# 1999年巴菲特致股东信 - 中英对照

【English】

window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function gtag(){dataLayer.push(arguments);} gtag('js', new Date()); gtag('config', 'UA-136883390-1'); Chairman's Letter - 1999 &nbsp; BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY INC. &nbsp; To the Shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway Inc.: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Our gain in net worth during 1999 was $358 million, which increased the per-share book value of both our Class A and Class B stock by 0.5%. Over the last 35 years (that is, since present management took over) per-share book value has grown from $19 to $37,987, a rate of 24.0% compounded annually. * *&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;All figures used in this report apply to Berkshire's A shares, the successor to the only stock that the company had outstanding before 1996. The B shares have an economic interest equal to 1/30th that of the A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The numbers on the facing page show just how poor our 1999 record was. We had the worst absolute performance of my tenure and, compared to the S&amp;P, the worst relative performance as well. Relative results are what concern us: Over time, bad relative numbers will produce unsatisfactory absolute results. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Even Inspector Clouseau could find last year's guilty party: your Chairman. My performance reminds me of the quarterback whose report card showed four Fs and a D but who nonetheless had an understanding coach. "Son," he drawled, "I think you're spending too much time on that one subject." &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;My "one subject" is capital allocation, and my grade for 1999 most assuredly is a D. What most hurt us during the year was the inferior performance of Berkshire's equity portfolio -- and responsibility for that portfolio, leaving aside the small piece of it run by Lou Simpson of GEICO, is entirely mine. Several of our largest investees badly lagged the market in 1999 because they've had disappointing operating results. We still like these businesses and are content to have major investments in them. But their stumbles damaged our performance last year, and it's no sure thing that they will quickly regain their stride. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The fallout from our weak results in 1999 was a more-than-commensurate drop in our stock price. In 1998, to go back a bit, the stock outperformed the business. Last year the business did much better than the stock, a divergence that has continued to the date of this letter. Over time, of course, the performance of the stock must roughly match the performance of the business. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Despite our poor showing last year, Charlie Munger, Berkshire's Vice Chairman and my partner, and I expect that the gain in Berkshire's intrinsic value over the next decade will modestly exceed the gain from owning the S&amp;P. We can't guarantee that, of course. But we are willing to back our conviction with our own money. To repeat a fact you've heard before, well over 99% of my net worth resides in Berkshire. Neither my wife nor I have ever sold a share of Berkshire and -- unless our checks stop clearing -- we have no intention of doing so. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Please note that I spoke of hoping to beat the S&amp;P "modestly." For Berkshire, truly large superiorities over that index are a thing of the past. They existed then because we could buy both businesses and stocks at far more attractive prices than we can now, and also because we then had a much smaller capital base, a situation that allowed us to consider a much wider range of investment opportunities than are available to us today. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Our optimism about Berkshire's performance is also tempered by the expectation -- indeed, in our minds, the virtual certainty -- that the S&amp;P will do far less well in the next decade or two than it has done since 1982. A recent article in Fortune expressed my views as to why this is inevitable, and I'm enclosing a copy with this report. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Our goal is to run our present businesses well -- a task made easy because of the outstanding managers we have in place -- and to acquire additional businesses having economic characteristics and managers comparable to those we already own. We made important progress in this respect during 1999 by acquiring Jordan's Furniture and contracting to buy a major portion of MidAmerican Energy. We will talk more about these companies later in the report but let me emphasize one point here: We bought both for cash, issuing no Berkshire shares. Deals of that kind aren't always possible, but that is the method of acquisition that Charlie and I vastly prefer. &nbsp; Guides to Intrinsic Value &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I often talk in these pages about intrinsic value, a key, though far from precise, measurement we utilize in our acquisitions of businesses and common stocks. (For an extensive discussion of this, and other investment and accounting terms and concepts, please refer to our Owner's Manual on pages 55 - 62. Intrinsic value is discussed on page 60.) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In our last four reports, we have furnished you a table that we regard as useful in estimating Berkshire's intrinsic value. In the updated version of that table, which follows, we trace two key components of value. The first column lists our per-share ownership of investments (including cash and equivalents but excluding assets held in our financial products operation) and the second column shows our per-share earnings from Berkshire's operating businesses before taxes and purchase-accounting adjustments (discussed on page 61), but after all interest and corporate expenses. The second column excludes all dividends, interest and capital gains that we realized from the investments presented in the first column. In effect, the columns show how Berkshire would look if it were split into two parts, with one entity holding our investments and the other operating all of our businesses and bearing all corporate costs. &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; Pre-tax Earnings (Loss) Per Share Investments With All Income from Year &nbsp; Per Share Investments Excluded 1969 ........................................................................... &nbsp;$ 45 $ 4.39 1979 ........................................................................... 577 13.07 1989 ........................................................................... 7,200 108.86 1999 ........................................................................... 47,339 (458.55) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Here are the growth rates of the two segments by decade: &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; Pre-tax Earnings Per Share &nbsp; &nbsp; Investments With All Income from Decade Ending &nbsp; Per Share Investments Excluded 1979 ............................................. 29.0% 11.5% 1989 ............................................. 28.7% 23.6% 1999 ............................................. &nbsp; 20.7% N.A. &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; Annual Growth Rate, 1969-1999 ................. 25.4% N.A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In 1999, our per-share investments changed very little, but our operating earnings, affected by negatives that overwhelmed some strong positives, fell apart. Most of our operating managers deserve a grade of A for delivering fine results and for having widened the difference between the intrinsic value of their businesses and the value at which these are carried on our balance sheet. But, offsetting this, we had a huge -- and, I believe, aberrational -- underwriting loss at General Re. Additionally, GEICO's underwriting profit fell, as we had predicted it would. GEICO's overall performance, though, was terrific, outstripping my ambitious goals. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We do not expect our underwriting earnings to improve in any dramatic way this year. Though GEICO's intrinsic value should grow by a highly satisfying amount, its underwriting performance is almost certain to weaken. That's because auto insurers, as a group, will do worse in 2000, and because we will materially increase our marketing expenditures. At General Re, we are raising rates and, if there is no mega-catastrophe in 2000, the company's underwriting loss should fall considerably. It takes some time, however, for the full effect of rate increases to kick in, and General Re is therefore likely to have another unsatisfactory underwriting year. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You should be aware that one item regularly working to widen the amount by which intrinsic value exceeds book value is the annual charge against income we take for amortization of goodwill -- an amount now running about $500 million. This charge reduces the amount of goodwill we show as an asset and likewise the amount that is included in our book value. This is an accounting matter having nothing to do with true economic goodwill, which increases in most years. But even if economic goodwill were to remain constant, the annual amortization charge would persistently widen the gap between intrinsic value and book value. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Though we can't give you a precise figure for Berkshire's intrinsic value, or even an approximation, Charlie and I can assure you that it far exceeds our $57.8 billion book value. Businesses such as See's and Buffalo News are now worth fifteen to twenty times the value at which they are carried on our books. Our goal is to continually widen this spread at all subsidiaries. A Managerial Story You Will Never Read Elsewhere &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Berkshire's collection of managers is unusual in several important ways. As one example, a very high percentage of these men and women are independently wealthy, having made fortunes in the businesses that they run. They work neither because they need the money nor because they are contractually obligated to -- we have no contracts at Berkshire. Rather, they work long and hard because they love their businesses. And I use the word "their" advisedly, since these managers are truly in charge -- there are no show-and-tell presentations in Omaha, no budgets to be approved by headquarters, no dictums issued about capital expenditures. We simply ask our managers to run their companies as if these are the sole asset of their families and will remain so for the next century. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Charlie and I try to behave with our managers just as we attempt to behave with Berkshire's shareholders, treating both groups as we would wish to be treated if our positions were reversed. Though "working" means nothing to me financially, I love doing it at Berkshire for some simple reasons: It gives me a sense of achievement, a freedom to act as I see fit and an opportunity to interact daily with people I like and trust. Why should our managers -- accomplished artists at what they do -- see things differently? &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In their relations with Berkshire, our managers often appear to be hewing to President Kennedy's charge, "Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do for your country." Here's a remarkable story from last year: It's about R. C. Willey, Utah's dominant home furnishing business, which Berkshire purchased from Bill Child and his family in 1995. Bill and most of his managers are Mormons, and for this reason R. C. Willey's stores have never operated on Sunday. This is a difficult way to do business: Sunday is the favorite shopping day for many customers. Bill, nonetheless, stuck to his principles -- and while doing so built his business from $250,000 of annual sales in 1954, when he took over, to $342 million in 1999. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bill felt that R. C. Willey could operate successfully in markets outside of Utah and in 1997 suggested that we open a store in Boise. I was highly skeptical about taking a no-Sunday policy into a new territory where we would be up against entrenched rivals open seven days a week. Nevertheless, this was Bill's business to run. So, despite my reservations, I told him to follow both his business judgment and his religious convictions. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bill then insisted on a truly extraordinary proposition: He would personally buy the land and build the store -- for about $9 million as it turned out -- and would sell it to us at his cost if it proved to be successful. On the other hand, if sales fell short of his expectations, we could exit the business without paying Bill a cent. This outcome, of course, would leave him with a huge investment in an empty building. I told him that I appreciated his offer but felt that if Berkshire was going to get the upside it should also take the downside. Bill said nothing doing: If there was to be failure because of his religious beliefs, he wanted to take the blow personally. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The store opened last August and immediately became a huge success. Bill thereupon turned the property over to us -- including some extra land that had appreciated significantly -- and we wrote him a check for his cost. And get this: Bill refused to take a dime of interest on the capital he had tied up over the two years . &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;If a manager has behaved similarly at some other public corporation, I haven't heard about it. You can understand why the opportunity to partner with people like Bill Child causes me to tap dance to work every morning. &nbsp; * * * * * * * * * * * * &nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A footnote: After our "soft" opening in August, we had a grand opening of the Boise store about a month later. Naturally, I went there to cut the ribbon (your Chairman, I wish to emphasize, is good for something ). In my talk I told the crowd how sales had far exceeded expectations, making us, by a considerable margin, the largest home furnishings store in Idaho. Then, as the speech progressed, my memory miraculously began to improve. By the end of my talk, it all had come back to me: Opening a store in Boise had been my idea. The Economics of Property/Casualty Insurance &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Our main business -- though we have others of great importance -- is insurance. To understand Berkshire, therefore, it is necessary that you understand how to evaluate an insurance company. The key determinants are: (1) the amount of float that the business generates; (2) its cost; and (3) most critical of all, the long-term outlook for both of these factors. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To begin with, float is money we hold but don't own. In an insurance operation, float arises because premiums are received before losses are paid, an interval that sometimes extends over many years. During that time, the insurer invests the money. This pleasant activity typically carries with it a downside: The premiums that an insurer takes in usually do not cover the losses and expenses it eventually must pay. That leaves it running an "underwriting loss," which is the cost of float. An insurance business has value if its cost of float over time is less than the cost the company would otherwise incur to obtain funds. But the business is a lemon if its cost of float is higher than market rates for money. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A caution is appropriate here: Because loss costs must be estimated, insurers have enormous latitude in figuring their underwriting results, and that makes it very difficult for investors to calculate a company's true cost of float. Errors of estimation, usually innocent but sometimes not, can be huge. The consequences of these miscalculations flow directly into earnings. An experienced observer can usually detect large-scale errors in reserving, but the general public can typically do no more than accept what's presented, and at times I have been amazed by the numbers that big-name auditors have implicitly blessed. In 1999 a number of insurers announced reserve adjustments that made a mockery of the "earnings" that investors had relied on earlier when making their buy and sell decisions. At Berkshire, we strive to be conservative and consistent in our reserving. Even so, we warn you that an unpleasant surprise is always possible. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The table that follows shows (at intervals) the float generated by the various segments of Berkshire's insurance operations since we entered the business 33 years ago upon acquiring National Indemnity Company (whose traditional lines are included in the segment "Other Primary"). For the table we have calculated our float -- which we generate in large amounts relative to our premium volume -- by adding net loss reserves, loss adjustment reserves, funds held under reinsurance assumed and unearned premium reserves, and then subtracting agents balances, prepaid acquisition costs, prepaid taxes and deferred charges applicable to assumed reinsurance. (Got that?) Yearend Float (in $ millions) Year GEICO General Re Other Reinsurance Other Primary Total 1967 20 20 1977 40 131 171 1987 701 807 1,508 1997 2,917 4,014 455 7,386 &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 1998 3,125 14,909 4,305 415 22,754 1999 3,444 15,166 6,285 403 25,298 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Growth of float is important -- but its cost is what's vital. Over the years we have usually recorded only a small underwriting loss -- which means our cost of float was correspondingly low -- or actually had an underwriting profit, which means we were being paid for holding other people's money. Indeed, our cumulative result through 1998 was an underwriting profit. In 1999, however, we incurred a $1.4 billion underwriting loss that left us with float cost of 5.8%. One mildly mitigating factor: We enthusiastically welcomed $400 million of the loss because it stems from business that will deliver us exceptional float over the next decade. The balance of the loss, however, was decidedly unwelcome, and our overall result must be judged extremely poor. Absent a mega-catastrophe, we expect float cost to fall in 2000, but any decline will be tempered by our aggressive plans for GEICO, which we will discuss later. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There are a number of people who deserve credit for manufacturing so much "no-cost" float over the years. Foremost is Ajit Jain. It's simply impossible to overstate Ajit's value to Berkshire: He has from scratch built an outstanding reinsurance business, which during his tenure has earned an underwriting profit and now holds $6.3 billion of float. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In Ajit, we have an underwriter equipped with the intelligence to properly rate most risks; the realism to forget about those he can't evaluate; the courage to write huge policies when the premium is appropriate; and the discipline to reject even the smallest risk when the premium is inadequate. It is rare to find a person possessing any one of these talents. For one person to have them all is remarkable. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Since Ajit specializes in super-cat reinsurance, a line in which losses are infrequent but extremely large when they occur, his business is sure to be far more volatile than most insurance operations. To date, we have benefitted from good luck on this volatile book. Even so, Ajit's achievements are truly extraordinary. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In a smaller but nevertheless important way, our "other primary" insurance operation has also added to Berkshire's intrinsic value. This collection of insurers has delivered a $192 million underwriting profit over the past five years while supplying us with the float shown in the table. In the insurance world, results like this are uncommon, and for their feat we thank Rod Eldred, Brad Kinstler, John Kizer, Don Towle and Don Wurster. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As I mentioned earlier, the General Re operation had an exceptionally poor underwriting year in 1999 (though investment income left the company well in the black). Our business was extremely underpriced, both domestically and internationally, a condition that is improving but not yet corrected. Over time, however, the company should develop a growing amount of low-cost float. At both General Re and its Cologne subsidiary, incentive compensation plans are now directly tied to the variables of float growth and cost of float, the same variables that determine value for owners. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Even though a reinsurer may have a tightly focused and rational compensation system, it cannot count on every year coming up roses. Reinsurance is a highly volatile business, and neither General Re nor Ajit's operation is immune to bad pricing behavior in the industry. But General Re has the distribution, the underwriting skills, the culture, and -- with Berkshire's backing -- the financial clout to become the world's most profitable reinsurance company. Getting there will take time, energy and discipline, but we have no doubt that Ron Ferguson and his crew can make it happen. GEICO (1-800-847-7536 or GEICO.com) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;GEICO made exceptional progress in 1999. The reasons are simple: We have a terrific business idea being implemented by an extraordinary manager, Tony Nicely. When Berkshire purchased GEICO at the beginning of 1996, we handed the keys to Tony and asked him to run the operation exactly as if he owned 100% of it. He has done the rest. Take a look at his scorecard: New Auto Auto Policies Years Policies (1)(2) In-Force (1) 1993 346,882 2,011,055 1994 384,217 2,147,549 1995 443,539 2,310,037 1996 592,300 2,543,699 1997 868,430 2,949,439 1998 1,249,875 3,562,644 1999 1,648,095 4,328,900 (1) "Voluntary" only; excludes assigned risks and the like. (2) Revised to exclude policies moved from one GEICO company to another. &nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In 1995, GEICO spent $33 million on marketing and had 652 telephone counselors. Last year the company spent $242 million, and the counselor count grew to 2,631. And we are just starting: The pace will step up materially in 2000. Indeed, we would happily commit $1 billion annually to marketing if we knew we could handle the business smoothly and if we expected the last dollar spent to produce new business at an attractive cost. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Currently two trends are affecting acquisition costs. The bad news is that it has become more expensive to develop inquiries. Media rates have risen, and we are also seeing diminishing returns -- that is, as both we and our competitors step up advertising, inquiries per ad fall for all of us. These negatives are partly offset, however, by the fact that our closure ratio -- the percentage of inquiries converted to sales -- has steadily improved. Overall, we believe that our cost of new business, though definitely rising, is well below that of the industry. Of even greater importance, our operating costs for renewal business are the lowest among broad-based national auto insurers. Both of these major competitive advantages are sustainable. Others may copy our model, but they will be unable to replicate our economics. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The table above makes it appear that GEICO's retention of policyholders is falling, but for two reasons appearances are in this case deceiving. First, in the last few years our business mix has moved away from "preferred" policyholders, for whom industrywide retention rates are high, toward "standard" and "non-standard" policyholders for whom retention rates are much lower. (Despite the nomenclature, the three classes have similar profit prospects.) Second, retention rates for relatively new policyholders are always lower than those for long-time customers -- and because of our accelerated growth, our policyholder ranks now include an increased proportion of new customers. Adjusted for these two factors, our retention rate has changed hardly at all. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We told you last year that underwriting margins for both GEICO and the industry would fall in 1999, and they did. We make a similar prediction for 2000. A few years ago margins got too wide, having enjoyed the effects of an unusual and unexpected decrease in the frequency and severity of accidents. The industry responded by reducing rates -- but now is having to contend with an increase in loss costs. We would not be surprised to see the margins of auto insurers deteriorate by around three percentage points in 2000. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Two negatives besides worsening frequency and severity will hurt the industry this year. First, rate increases go into effect only slowly, both because of regulatory delay and because insurance contracts must run their course before new rates can be put in. Second, reported earnings of many auto insurers have benefitted in the last few years from reserve releases, made possible because the companies overestimated their loss costs in still-earlier years. This reservoir of redundant reserves has now largely dried up, and future boosts to earnings from this source will be minor at best. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In compensating its associates -- from Tony on down -- GEICO continues to use two variables, and only two, in determining what bonuses and profit-sharing contributions will be: 1) its percentage growth in policyholders and 2) the earnings of its "seasoned" business, meaning policies that have been with us for more than a year. We did outstandingly well on both fronts during 1999 and therefore made a profit-sharing payment of 28.4% of salary (in total, $113.3 million) to the great majority of our associates. Tony and I love writing those checks. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;At Berkshire, we want to have compensation policies that are both easy to understand and in sync with what we wish our associates to accomplish. Writing new business is expensive (and, as mentioned, getting more expensive). If we were to include those costs in our calculation of bonuses -- as managements did before our arrival at GEICO -- we would be penalizing our associates for garnering new policies, even though these are very much in Berkshire's interest. So, in effect, we say to our associates that we will foot the bill for new business. Indeed, because percentage growth in policyholders is part of our compensation scheme, we reward our associates for producing this initially-unprofitable business. And then we reward them additionally for holding down costs on our seasoned business. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Despite the extensive advertising we do, our best source of new business is word-of-mouth recommendations from existing policyholders, who on the whole are pleased with our prices and service. An article published last year by Kiplinger's Personal Finance Magazine gives a good picture of where we stand in customer satisfaction: The magazine's survey of 20 state insurance departments showed that GEICO's complaint ratio was well below the ratio for most of its major competitors. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Our strong referral business means that we probably could maintain our policy count by spending as little as $50 million annually on advertising. That's a guess, of course, and we will never know whether it is accurate because Tony's foot is going to stay on the advertising pedal (and my foot will be on his). Nevertheless, I want to emphasize that a major percentage of the $300-$350 million we will spend in 2000 on advertising, as well as large additional costs we will incur for sales counselors, communications and facilities, are optional outlays we choose to make so that we can both achieve significant growth and extend and solidify the promise of the GEICO brand in the minds of Americans. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personally, I think these expenditures are the best investment Berkshire can make. Through its advertising, GEICO is acquiring a direct relationship with a huge number of households that, on average, will send us $1,100 year after year. That makes us -- among all companies, selling whatever kind of product -- one of the country's leading direct merchandisers. Also, as we build our long-term relationships with more and more families, cash is pouring in rather than going out (no Internet economics here). Last year, as GEICO increased its customer base by 766,256, it gained $590 million of cash from operating earnings and the increase in float. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the past three years, we have increased our market share in personal auto insurance from 2.7% to 4.1%. But we rightfully belong in many more households -- maybe even yours. Give us a call and find out. About 40% of those people checking our rates find that they can save money by doing business with us. The proportion is not 100% because insurers differ in their underwriting judgments, with some giving more credit than we do to drivers who live in certain geographic areas or work at certain occupations. Our closure rate indicates, however, that we more frequently offer the low price than does any other national carrier selling insurance to all comers. Furthermore, in 40 states we can offer a special discount -- usually 8% -- to our shareholders. Just be sure to identify yourself as a Berkshire owner so that our sales counselor can make the appropriate adjustment. * * * * * * * * * * * * &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It's with sadness that I report to you that Lorimer Davidson, GEICO's former Chairman, died last November, a few days after his 97 th birthday. For GEICO, Davy was a business giant who moved the company up to the big leagues. For me, he was a friend, teacher and hero. I have told you of his lifelong kindnesses to me in past reports. Clearly, my life would have developed far differently had he not been a part of it. Tony, Lou Simpson and I visited Davy in August and marveled at his mental alertness -- particularly in all matters regarding GEICO. He was the company's number one supporter right up to the end, and we will forever miss him. Aviation Services &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Our two aviation services companies -- FlightSafety International ("FSI") and Executive Jet Aviation ("EJA") -- are both runaway leaders in their field. EJA, which sells and manages the fractional ownership of jet aircraft, through its NetJets&reg; program, is larger than its next two competitors combined. FSI trains pilots (as well as other transportation professionals) and is five times or so the size of its nearest competitor. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Another common characteristic of the companies is that they are still managed by their founding entrepreneurs. Al Ueltschi started FSI in 1951 with $10,000, and Rich Santulli invented the fractional-ownership industry in 1986. These men are both remarkable managers who have no financial need to work but thrive on helping their companies grow and excel. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Though these two businesses have leadership positions that are similar, they differ in their economic characteristics. FSI must lay out huge amounts of capital. A single flight simulator can cost as much as $15 million -- and we have 222. Only one person at a time, furthermore, can be trained in a simulator, which means that the capital investment per dollar of revenue at FSI is exceptionally high. Operating margins must therefore also be high, if we are to earn a reasonable return on capital. Last year we made capital expenditures of $215 million at FSI and FlightSafety Boeing, its 50%-owned affiliate. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;At EJA, in contrast, the customer owns the equipment, though we, of course, must invest in a core fleet of our own planes to ensure outstanding service. For example, the Sunday after Thanksgiving, EJA's busiest day of the year, strains our resources since fractions of 169 planes are owned by 1,412 customers, many of whom are bent on flying home between 3 and 6 p.m. On that day, and certain others, we need a supply of company-owned aircraft to make sure all parties get where they want, when they want. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Still, most of the planes we fly are owned by customers, which means that modest pre-tax margins in this business can produce good returns on equity. Currently, our customers own planes worth over $2 billion, and in addition we have $4.2 billion of planes on order. Indeed, the limiting factor in our business right now is the availability of planes. We now are taking delivery of about 8% of all business jets manufactured in the world, and we wish we could get a bigger share than that. Though EJA was supply-constrained in 1999, its recurring revenues -- monthly management fees plus hourly flight fees -- increased 46%. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The fractional-ownership industry is still in its infancy. EJA is now building critical mass in Europe, and over time we will expand around the world. Doing that will be expensive -- very expensive -- but we will spend what it takes. Scale is vital to both us and our customers: The company with the most planes in the air worldwide will be able to offer its customers the best service. "Buy a fraction, get a fleet" has real meaning at EJA. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;EJA enjoys another important advantage in that its two largest competitors are both subsidiaries of aircraft manufacturers and sell only the aircraft their parents make. Though these are fine planes, these competitors are severely limited in the cabin styles and mission capabilities they can offer. EJA, in contrast, offers a wide array of planes from five suppliers. Consequently, we can give the customer whatever he needs to buy -- rather than his getting what the competitor's parent needs to sell. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Last year in this report, I described my family's delight with the one-quarter (200 flight hours annually) of a Hawker 1000 that we had owned since 1995. I got so pumped up by my own prose that shortly thereafter I signed up for one-sixteenth of a Cessna V Ultra as well. Now my annual outlays at EJA and Borsheim's, combined, total ten times my salary. Think of this as a rough guideline for your own expenditures with us. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;During the past year, two of Berkshire's outside directors have also signed on with EJA. (Maybe we're paying them too much.) You should be aware that they and I are charged exactly the same price for planes and service as is any other customer: EJA follows a "most favored nations" policy, with no one getting a special deal. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And now, brace yourself. Last year, EJA passed the ultimate test: Charlie signed up. No other endorsement could speak more eloquently to the value of the EJA service. Give us a call at 1-800-848-6436 and ask for our "white paper" on fractional ownership. Acquisitions of 1999 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;At both GEICO and Executive Jet, our best source of new customers is the happy ones we already have. Indeed, about 65% of our new owners of aircraft come as referrals from current owners who have fallen in love with the service. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Our acquisitions usually develop in the same way. At other companies, executives may devote themselves to pursuing acquisition possibilities with investment bankers, utilizing an auction process that has become standardized. In this exercise the bankers prepare a "book" that makes me think of the Superman comics of my youth. In the Wall Street version, a formerly mild-mannered company emerges from the investment banker's phone booth able to leap over competitors in a single bound and with earnings moving faster than a speeding bullet. Titillated by the book's description of the acquiree's powers, acquisition-hungry CEOs -- Lois Lanes all, beneath their cool exteriors -- promptly swoon. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What's particularly entertaining in these books is the precision with which earnings are projected for many years ahead. If you ask the author-banker, however, what his own firm will earn next month , he will go into a protective crouch and tell you that business and markets are far too uncertain for him to venture a forecast. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Here's one story I can't resist relating: In 1985, a major investment banking house undertook to sell Scott Fetzer, offering it widely -- but with no success. Upon reading of this strikeout, I wrote Ralph Schey, then and now Scott Fetzer's CEO, expressing an interest in buying the business. I had never met Ralph, but within a week we had a deal. Unfortunately, Scott Fetzer's letter of engagement with the banking firm provided it a $2.5 million fee upon sale, even if it had nothing to do with finding the buyer. I guess the lead banker felt he should do something for his payment, so he graciously offered us a copy of the book on Scott Fetzer that his firm had prepared. With his customary tact, Charlie responded: "I'll pay $2.5 million not to read it." &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;At Berkshire, our carefully-crafted acquisition strategy is simply to wait for the phone to ring. Happily, it sometimes does so, usually because a manager who sold to us earlier has recommended to a friend that he think about following suit. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Which brings us to the furniture business. Two years ago I recounted how the acquisition of Nebraska Furniture Mart in 1983 and my subsequent association with the Blumkin family led to follow-on transactions with R. C. Willey (1995) and Star Furniture (1997). For me, these relationships have all been terrific. Not only did Berkshire acquire three outstanding retailers; these deals also allowed me to become friends with some of the finest people you will ever meet. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Naturally, I have persistently asked the Blumkins, Bill Child and Melvyn Wolff whether there are any more out there like you. Their invariable answer was the Tatelman brothers of New England and their remarkable furniture business, Jordan's. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I met Barry and Eliot Tatelman last year and we soon signed an agreement for Berkshire to acquire the company. Like our three previous furniture acquisitions, this business had long been in the family -- in this case since 1927, when Barry and Eliot's grandfather began operations in a Boston suburb. Under the brothers' management, Jordan's has grown ever more dominant in its region, becoming the largest furniture retailer in New Hampshire as well as Massachusetts. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Tatelmans don't just sell furniture or manage stores. They also present customers with a dazzling entertainment experience called "shoppertainment." A family visiting a store can have a terrific time, while concurrently viewing an extraordinary selection of merchandise. The business results are also extraordinary: Jordan's has the highest sales per square foot of any major furniture operation in the country. I urge you to visit one of their stores if you are in the Boston area -- particularly the one at Natick, which is Jordan's newest. Bring money. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Barry and Eliot are classy people -- just like their counterparts at Berkshire's three other furniture operations. When they sold to us, they elected to give each of their employees at least 50� for every hour that he or she had worked for Jordan's. This payment added up to $9 million, which came from the Tatelmans' own pockets, not from Berkshire's. And Barry and Eliot were thrilled to write the checks. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Each of our furniture operations is number one in its territory. We now sell more furniture than anyone else in Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Texas, Nebraska, Utah and Idaho. Last year Star's Melvyn Wolff and his sister, Shirley Toomim, scored two major successes: a move into San Antonio and a significant enlargement of Star's store in Austin. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There's no operation in the furniture retailing business remotely like the one assembled by Berkshire. It's fun for me and profitable for you. W. C. Fields once said, "It was a woman who drove me to drink, but unfortunately I never had the chance to thank her." I don't want to make that mistake. My thanks go to Louie, Ron and Irv Blumkin for getting me started in the furniture business and for unerringly guiding me as we have assembled the group we now have. * * * * * * * * * * * * &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Now, for our second acquisition deal: It came to us through my good friend, Walter Scott, Jr., chairman of Level 3 Communications and a director of Berkshire. Walter has many other business connections as well, and one of them is with MidAmerican Energy, a utility company in which he has substantial holdings and on whose board he sits. At a conference in California that we both attended last September, Walter casually asked me whether Berkshire might be interested in making a large investment in MidAmerican, and from the start the idea of being in partnership with Walter struck me as a good one. Upon returning to Omaha, I read some of MidAmerican's public reports and had two short meetings with Walter and David Sokol, MidAmerican's talented and entrepreneurial CEO. I then said that, at an appropriate price, we would indeed like to make a deal. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Acquisitions in the electric utility industry are complicated by a variety of regulations including the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935. Therefore, we had to structure a transaction that would avoid Berkshire gaining voting control. Instead we are purchasing an 11% fixed-income security, along with a combination of common stock and exchangeable preferred that will give Berkshire just under 10% of the voting power of MidAmerican but about 76% of the equity interest. All told, our investment will be about $2 billion. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Walter characteristically backed up his convictions with real money: He and his family will buy more MidAmerican stock for cash when the transaction closes, bringing their total investment to about $280 million. Walter will also be the controlling shareholder of the company, and I can't think of a better person to hold that post. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Though there are many regulatory constraints in the utility industry, it's possible that we will make additional commitments in the field. If we do, the amounts involved could be large. Acquisition Accounting &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Once again, I would like to make some comments about accounting, in this case about its application to acquisitions. This is currently a very contentious topic and, before the dust settles, Congress may even intervene (a truly terrible idea). &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;When a company is acquired, generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP") currently condone two very different ways of recording the transaction: "purchase" and "pooling." In a pooling, stock must be the currency; in a purchase, payment can be made in either cash or stock. Whatever the currency, managements usually detest purchase accounting because it almost always requires that a "goodwill" account be established and subsequently written off -- a process that saddles earnings with a large annual charge that normally persists for decades. In contrast, pooling avoids a goodwill account, which is why managements love it. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Now, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") has proposed an end to pooling, and many CEOs are girding for battle. It will be an important fight, so we'll venture some opinions. To begin with, we agree with the many managers who argue that goodwill amortization charges are usually spurious. You'll find my thinking about this in the appendix to our 1983 annual report, which is available on our website, and in the Owner's Manual on pages 55 - 62. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For accounting rules to mandate amortization that will, in the usual case, conflict with reality is deeply troublesome: Most accounting charges relate to what's going on, even if they don't precisely measure it. As an example, depreciation charges can't with precision calibrate the decline in value that physical assets suffer, but these charges do at least describe something that is truly occurring: Physical assets invariably deteriorate. Correspondingly, obsolescence charges for inventories, bad debt charges for receivables and accruals for warranties are among the charges that reflect true costs. The annual charges for these expenses can't be exactly measured, but the necessity for estimating them is obvious. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In contrast, economic goodwill does not, in many cases, diminish. Indeed, in a great many instances -- perhaps most -- it actually grows in value over time. In character, economic goodwill is much like land: The value of both assets is sure to fluctuate, but the direction in which value is going to go is in no way ordained. At See's, for example, economic goodwill has grown, in an irregular but very substantial manner, for 78 years. And, if we run the business right, growth of that kind will probably continue for at least another 78 years. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To escape from the fiction of goodwill charges, managers embrace the fiction of pooling. This accounting convention is grounded in the poetic notion that when two rivers merge their streams become indistinguishable. Under this concept, a company that has been merged into a larger enterprise has not been "purchased" (even though it will often have received a large "sell-out" premium). Consequently, no goodwill is created, and those pesky subsequent charges to earnings are eliminated. Instead, the accounting for the ongoing entity is handled as if the businesses had forever been one unit. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;So much for poetry. The reality of merging is usually far different: There is indisputably an acquirer and an acquiree, and the latter has been "purchased," no matter how the deal has been structured. If you think otherwise, just ask employees severed from their jobs which company was the conqueror and which was the conquered. You will find no confusion. So on this point the FASB is correct: In most mergers, a purchase has been made. Yes, there are some true "mergers of equals," but they are few and far between. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Charlie and I believe there's a reality-based approach that should both satisfy the FASB, which correctly wishes to record a purchase, and meet the objections of managements to nonsensical charges for diminution of goodwill. We would first have the acquiring company record its purchase price -- whether paid in stock or cash -- at fair value. In most cases, this procedure would create a large asset representing economic goodwill. We would then leave this asset on the books, not requiring its amortization. Later, if the economic goodwill became impaired, as it sometimes would, it would be written down just as would any other asset judged to be impaired. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;If our proposed rule were to be adopted, it should be applied retroactively so that acquisition accounting would be consistent throughout America -- a far cry from what exists today. One prediction: If this plan were to take effect, managements would structure acquisitions more sensibly, deciding whether to use cash or stock based on the real consequences for their shareholders rather than on the unreal consequences for their reported earnings. * * * * * * * * * * * * &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In our purchase of Jordan's, we followed a procedure that will maximize the cash produced for our shareholders but minimize the earnings we report to you. Berkshire purchased assets for cash, an approach that on our tax returns permits us to amortize the resulting goodwill over a 15-year period. Obviously, this tax deduction materially increases the amount of cash delivered by the business. In contrast, when stock, rather than assets, is purchased for cash, the resulting writeoffs of goodwill are not tax-deductible. The economic difference between these two approaches is substantial. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;From the economic standpoint of the acquiring company, the worst deal of all is a stock-for-stock acquisition. Here, a huge price is often paid without there being any step-up in the tax basis of either the stock of the acquiree or its assets. If the acquired entity is subsequently sold, its owner may owe a large capital gains tax (at a 35% or greater rate), even though the sale may truly be producing a major economic loss. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We have made some deals at Berkshire that used far-from-optimal tax structures. These deals occurred because the sellers insisted on a given structure and because, overall, we still felt the acquisition made sense. We have never done an inefficiently-structured deal, however, in order to make our figures look better. Sources of Reported Earnings &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The table that follows shows the main sources of Berkshire's reported earnings. In this presentation, purchase-accounting adjustments are not assigned to the specific businesses to which they apply, but are instead aggregated and shown separately. This procedure lets you view the earnings of our businesses as they would have been reported had we not purchased them. For the reasons discussed on page 61, this form of presentation seems to us to be more useful to investors and managers than one utilizing generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), which require purchase-premiums to be charged off business-by-business. The total earnings we show in the table are, of course, identical to the GAAP total in our audited financial statements. (in millions) Berkshire's Share of Net Earnings (after taxes and Pre-Tax Earnings minority interests) 1999 1998 1999 1998 Operating Earnings: &nbsp;&nbsp;Insurance Group: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Underwriting -- Reinsurance .................... $(1,440) $(21) $(927) $(14) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Underwriting -- GEICO .......................... 24 269 16 175 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Underwriting -- Other Primary ................. 22 17 14 10 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Net Investment Income ............................ 2,482 974 1,764 731 &nbsp;&nbsp;Buffalo News ........................................... 55 53 34 32 &nbsp;&nbsp;Finance and Financial Products Businesses 125 205 86 133 &nbsp;&nbsp;Flight Services ......................................... 225 181 (1) 132 110 (1) &nbsp;&nbsp;Home Furnishings .................................... 79 (2) 72 46 (2) 41 &nbsp;&nbsp;International Dairy Queen ........................ 56 58 35 35 &nbsp;&nbsp;Jewelry ................................................... 51 39 31 23 &nbsp;&nbsp;Scott Fetzer (excluding finance operation) 147 137 92 85 &nbsp;&nbsp;See's Candies ......................................... 74 62 46 40 &nbsp;&nbsp;Shoe Group ............................................ 17 33 11 23 &nbsp;&nbsp;Purchase-Accounting Adjustments ......... (739) (123) (648) (118) &nbsp;&nbsp;Interest Expense (3) ............................... (109) (100) (70) (63) &nbsp;&nbsp;Shareholder-Designated Contributions .... (17) (17) (11) (11) &nbsp;&nbsp;Other ...................................................... 33 60 (4) 20 45 (4) Operating Earnings .................................... 1,085 1,899 671 1,277 Capital Gains from Investments ................. 1,365 2,415 886 1,553 Total Earnings - All Entities ....................... $2,450 $4,314 $1,557 $ 2,830 &nbsp; ===== ===== ===== ===== (1) Includes Executive Jet from August 7, 1998. (3) Excludes interest expense of Finance Businesses. (2) Includes Jordan's Furniture from November 13, 1999. (4) Includes General Re operations for ten days in 1998. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Almost all of our manufacturing, retailing and service businesses had excellent results in 1999. The exception was Dexter Shoe, and there the shortfall did not occur because of managerial problems: In skills, energy and devotion to their work, the Dexter executives are every bit the equal of our other managers. But we manufacture shoes primarily in the U.S., and it has become extremely difficult for domestic producers to compete effectively. In 1999, approximately 93% of the 1.3 billion pairs of shoes purchased in this country came from abroad, where extremely low-cost labor is the rule. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Counting both Dexter and H. H. Brown, we are currently the leading domestic manufacturer of shoes, and we are likely to continue to be. We have loyal, highly-skilled workers in our U.S. plants, and we want to retain every job here that we can. Nevertheless, in order to remain viable, we are sourcing more of our output internationally. In doing that, we have incurred significant severance and relocation costs that are included in the earnings we show in the table. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A few years back, Helzberg's, our 200-store jewelry operation, needed to make operating adjustments to restore margins to appropriate levels. Under Jeff Comment's leadership, the job was done and profits have dramatically rebounded. In the shoe business, where we have Harold Alfond, Peter Lunder, Frank Rooney and Jim Issler in charge, I believe we will see a similar improvement over the next few years. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;See's Candies deserves a special comment, given that it achieved a record operating margin of 24% last year. Since we bought See's for $25 million in 1972, it has earned $857 million pre-tax. And, despite its growth, the business has required very little additional capital. Give the credit for this performance to Chuck Huggins. Charlie and I put him in charge the day of our purchase, and his fanatical insistence on both product quality and friendly service has rewarded customers, employees and owners. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Chuck gets better every year. When he took charge of See's at age 46, the company's pre-tax profit, expressed in millions, was about 10% of his age. Today he's 74, and the ratio has increased to 100%. Having discovered this mathematical relationship -- let's call it Huggins' Law -- Charlie and I now become giddy at the mere thought of Chuck's birthday. * * * * * * * * * * * * &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Additional information about our various businesses is given on pages 39 - 54, where you will also find our segment earnings reported on a GAAP basis. In addition, on pages 63 - 69, we have rearranged Berkshire's financial data into four segments on a non-GAAP basis, a presentation that corresponds to the way Charlie and I think about the company. Look-Through Earnings &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reported earnings are an inadequate measure of economic progress at Berkshire, in part because the numbers shown in the table presented earlier include only the dividends we receive from investees -- though these dividends typically represent only a small fraction of the earnings attributable to our ownership. Not that we mind this division of money, since on balance we regard the undistributed earnings of investees as more valuable to us than the portion paid out. The reason for our thinking is simple: Our investees often have the opportunity to reinvest earnings at high rates of return. So why should we want them paid out? &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To depict something closer to economic reality at Berkshire than reported earnings, though, we employ the concept of "look-through" earnings. As we calculate these, they consist of: (1) the operating earnings reported in the previous section, plus; (2) our share of the retained operating earnings of major investees that, under GAAP accounting, are not reflected in our profits, less; (3) an allowance for the tax that would be paid by Berkshire if these retained earnings of investees had instead been distributed to us. When tabulating "operating earnings" here, we exclude purchase-accounting adjustments as well as capital gains and other major non-recurring items. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The following table sets forth our 1999 look-through earnings, though I warn you that the figures can be no more than approximate, since they are based on a number of judgment calls. (The dividends paid to us by these investees have been included in the operating earnings itemized on page 13, mostly under "Insurance Group: Net Investment Income.") &nbsp; &nbsp; Berkshire's Approximate Berkshire's Share of Undistributed Berkshire's Major Investees Ownership at Yearend (1) Operating Earnings (in millions) (2) &nbsp; American Express Company ........... 11.3% $228 The Coca-Cola Company ............... 8.1% 144 Freddie Mac .................................. 8.6% 127 The Gillette Company .................... 9.0% 53 M&amp;T Bank ................................... 6.5% 17 The Washington Post Company ..... 18.3% 30 Wells Fargo &amp; Company ............... 3.6% 108 &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; Berkshire's share of undistributed earnings of major investees 707 Hypothetical tax on these undistributed investee earnings (3) (99) Reported operating earnings of Berkshire 1,318 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Total look-through earnings of Berkshire $ 1,926 &nbsp; &nbsp; ===== &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(1) Does not include shares allocable to minority interests &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(2) Calculated on average ownership for the year &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(3) The tax rate used is 14%, which is the rate Berkshire pays on the dividends it receives Investments &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Below we present our common stock investments. Those that had a market value of more than $750 million at the end of 1999 are itemized. &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 12/31/99 Shares &nbsp; Company Cost* Market &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; (dollars in millions) 50,536,900 &nbsp; American Express Company ....... $1,470 $ 8,402 200,000,000 &nbsp; The Coca-Cola Company ........ 1,299 11,650 59,559,300 &nbsp; Freddie Mac ................ 294 2,803 96,000,000 &nbsp; The Gillette Company .......... 600 3,954 1,727,765 &nbsp; The Washington Post Company ....... 11 960 59,136,680 &nbsp; Wells Fargo &amp; Company ........ 349 2,391 &nbsp; &nbsp; Others ...................... 4,180 6,848 &nbsp; &nbsp; Total Common Stocks ............. $8,203 $37,008 &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; ===== ====== * Represents tax-basis cost which, in aggregate, is $691 million less than GAAP cost. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We made few portfolio changes in 1999. As I mentioned earlier, several of the companies in which we have large investments had disappointing business results last year. Nevertheless, we believe these companies have important competitive advantages that will endure over time. This attribute, which makes for good long-term investment results, is one Charlie and I occasionally believe we can identify. More often, however, we can't -- not at least with a high degree of conviction. This explains, by the way, why we don't own stocks of tech companies, even though we share the general view that our society will be transformed by their products and services. Our problem -- which we can't solve by studying up -- is that we have no insights into which participants in the tech field possess a truly durable competitive advantage. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Our lack of tech insights, we should add, does not distress us. After all, there are a great many business areas in which Charlie and I have no special capital-allocation expertise. For instance, we bring nothing to the table when it comes to evaluating patents, manufacturing processes or geological prospects. So we simply don't get into judgments in those fields. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;If we have a strength, it is in recognizing when we are operating well within our circle of competence and when we are approaching the perimeter. Predicting the long-term economics of companies that operate in fast-changing industries is simply far beyond our perimeter. If others claim predictive skill in those industries -- and seem to have their claims validated by the behavior of the stock market -- we neither envy nor emulate them. Instead, we just stick with what we understand. If we stray, we will have done so inadvertently, not because we got restless and substituted hope for rationality. Fortunately, it's almost certain there will be opportunities from time to time for Berkshire to do well within the circle we've staked out. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Right now, the prices of the fine businesses we already own are just not that attractive. In other words, we feel much better about the businesses than their stocks. That's why we haven't added to our present holdings. Nevertheless, we haven't yet scaled back our portfolio in a major way: If the choice is between a questionable business at a comfortable price or a comfortable business at a questionable price, we much prefer the latter. What really gets our attention, however, is a comfortable business at a comfortable price. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Our reservations about the prices of securities we own apply also to the general level of equity prices. We have never attempted to forecast what the stock market is going to do in the next month or the next year, and we are not trying to do that now. But, as I point out in the enclosed article, equity investors currently seem wildly optimistic in their expectations about future returns. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We see the growth in corporate profits as being largely tied to the business done in the country (GDP), and we see GDP growing at a real rate of about 3%. In addition, we have hypothesized 2% inflation. Charlie and I have no particular conviction about the accuracy of 2%. However, it's the market's view: Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) yield about two percentage points less than the standard treasury bond, and if you believe inflation rates are going to be higher than that, you can profit by simply buying TIPS and shorting Governments. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;If profits do indeed grow along with GDP, at about a 5% rate, the valuation placed on American business is unlikely to climb by much more than that. Add in something for dividends, and you emerge with returns from equities that are dramatically less than most investors have either experienced in the past or expect in the future. If investor expectations become more realistic -- and they almost certainly will -- the market adjustment is apt to be severe, particularly in sectors in which speculation has been concentrated. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Berkshire will someday have opportunities to deploy major amounts of cash in equity markets -- we are confident of that. But, as the song goes, "Who knows where or when?" Meanwhile, if anyone starts explaining to you what is going on in the truly-manic portions of this "enchanted" market, you might remember still another line of song: "Fools give you reasons, wise men never try." Share Repurchases &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Recently, a number of shareholders have suggested to us that Berkshire repurchase its shares. Usually the requests were rationally based, but a few leaned on spurious logic. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There is only one combination of facts that makes it advisable for a company to repurchase its shares: First, the company has available funds -- cash plus sensible borrowing capacity -- beyond the near-term needs of the business and, second, finds its stock selling in the market below its intrinsic value, conservatively-calculated. To this we add a caveat: Shareholders should have been supplied all the information they need for estimating that value. Otherwise, insiders could take advantage of their uninformed partners and buy out their interests at a fraction of true worth. We have, on rare occasions, seen that happen. Usually, of course, chicanery is employed to drive stock prices up, not down. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The business "needs" that I speak of are of two kinds: First, expenditures that a company must make to maintain its competitive position (e.g., the remodeling of stores at Helzberg's) and, second, optional outlays, aimed at business growth, that management expects will produce more than a dollar of value for each dollar spent (R. C. Willey's expansion into Idaho). &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;When available funds exceed needs of those kinds, a company with a growth-oriented shareholder population can buy new businesses or repurchase shares. If a company's stock is selling well below intrinsic value, repurchases usually make the most sense. In the mid-1970s, the wisdom of making these was virtually screaming at managements, but few responded. In most cases, those that did made their owners much wealthier than if alternative courses of action had been pursued. Indeed, during the 1970s (and, spasmodically, for some years thereafter) we searched for companies that were large repurchasers of their shares. This often was a tipoff that the company was both undervalued and run by a shareholder-oriented management. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;That day is past. Now, repurchases are all the rage, but are all too often made for an unstated and, in our view, ignoble reason: to pump or support the stock price. The shareholder who chooses to sell today, of course, is benefitted by any buyer, whatever his origin or motives. But the continuing shareholder is penalized by repurchases above intrinsic value. Buying dollar bills for $1.10 is not good business for those who stick around. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Charlie and I admit that we feel confident in estimating intrinsic value for only a portion of traded equities and then only when we employ a range of values, rather than some pseudo-precise figure. Nevertheless, it appears to us that many companies now making repurchases are overpaying departing shareholders at the expense of those who stay. In defense of those companies, I would say that it is natural for CEOs to be optimistic about their own businesses. They also know a whole lot more about them than I do. However, I can't help but feel that too often today's repurchases are dictated by management's desire to "show confidence" or be in fashion rather than by a desire to enhance per-share value. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sometimes, too, companies say they are repurchasing shares to offset the shares issued when stock options granted at much lower prices are exercised. This "buy high, sell low" strategy is one many unfortunate investors have employed -- but never intentionally! Managements, however, seem to follow this perverse activity very cheerfully. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Of course, both option grants and repurchases may make sense -- but if that's the case, it's not because the two activities are logically related. Rationally, a company's decision to repurchase shares or to issue them should stand on its own feet. Just because stock has been issued to satisfy options -- or for any other reason -- does not mean that stock should be repurchased at a price above intrinsic value. Correspondingly, a stock that sells well below intrinsic value should be repurchased whether or not stock has previously been issued (or may be because of outstanding options). &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You should be aware that, at certain times in the past, I have erred in not making repurchases. My appraisal of Berkshire's value was then too conservative or I was too enthused about some alternative use of funds. We have therefore missed some opportunities -- though Berkshire's trading volume at these points was too light for us to have done much buying, which means that the gain in our per-share value would have been minimal. (A repurchase of, say, 2% of a company's shares at a 25% discount from per-share intrinsic value produces only a �% gain in that value at most -- and even less if the funds could alternatively have been deployed in value-building moves.) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Some of the letters we've received clearly imply that the writer is unconcerned about intrinsic value considerations but instead wants us to trumpet an intention to repurchase so that the stock will rise (or quit going down). If the writer wants to sell tomorrow, his thinking makes sense -- for him! -- but if he intends to hold, he should instead hope the stock falls and trades in enough volume for us to buy a lot of it. That's the only way a repurchase program can have any real benefit for a continuing shareholder. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We will not repurchase shares unless we believe Berkshire stock is selling well below intrinsic value, conservatively calculated. Nor will we attempt to talk the stock up or down. (Neither publicly or privately have I ever told anyone to buy or sell Berkshire shares.) Instead we will give all shareholders -- and potential shareholders -- the same valuation-related information we would wish to have if our positions were reversed. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Recently, when the A shares fell below $45,000, we considered making repurchases. We decided, however, to delay buying, if indeed we elect to do any , until shareholders have had the chance to review this report. If we do find that repurchases make sense, we will only rarely place bids on the New York Stock Exchange ("NYSE"). Instead, we will respond to offers made directly to us at or below the NYSE bid. If you wish to offer stock, have your broker call Mark Millard at 402-346-1400. When a trade occurs, the broker can either record it in the "third market" or on the NYSE. We will favor purchase of the B shares if they are selling at more than a 2% discount to the A. We will not engage in transactions involving fewer than 10 shares of A or 50 shares of B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Please be clear about one point: We will never make purchases with the intention of stemming a decline in Berkshire's price. Rather we will make them if and when we believe that they represent an attractive use of the Company's money. At best, repurchases are likely to have only a very minor effect on the future rate of gain in our stock's intrinsic value. Shareholder-Designated Contributions &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;About 97.3% of all eligible shares participated in Berkshire's 1999 shareholder-designated contributions program, with contributions totaling $17.2 million. A full description of the program appears on pages 70 - 71. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cumulatively, over the 19 years of the program, Berkshire has made contributions of $147 million pursuant to the instructions of our shareholders. The rest of Berkshire's giving is done by our subsidiaries, which stick to the philanthropic patterns that prevailed before they were acquired (except that their former owners themselves take on the responsibility for their personal charities). In aggregate, our subsidiaries made contributions of $13.8 million in 1999, including in-kind donations of $2.5 million. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To participate in future programs, you must own Class A shares that are registered in the name of the actual owner, not the nominee name of a broker, bank or depository. Shares not so registered on August 31, 2000, will be ineligible for the 2000 program. When you get the contributions form from us, return it promptly so that it does not get put aside or forgotten. Designations received after the due date will not be honored. The Annual Meeting &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This year's Woodstock Weekend for Capitalists will follow a format slightly different from that of recent years. We need to make a change because the Aksarben Coliseum, which served us well the past three years, is gradually being closed down. Therefore, we are relocating to the Civic Auditorium (which is on Capitol Avenue between 18 th and 19 th , behind the Doubletree Hotel), the only other facility in Omaha offering the space we require. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Civic, however, is located in downtown Omaha, and we would create a parking and traffic nightmare if we were to meet there on a weekday. We will, therefore, convene on Saturday, April 29, with the doors opening at 7 a.m., the movie beginning at 8:30 and the meeting itself commencing at 9:30. As in the past, we will run until 3:30 with a short break at noon for food, which will be available at the Civic's concession stands. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;An attachment to the proxy material that is enclosed with this report explains how you can obtain the credential you will need for admission to the meeting and other events. As for plane, hotel and car reservations, we have again signed up American Express (800-799-6634) to give you special help. In our normal fashion, we will run buses from the larger hotels to the meeting. After the meeting, the buses will make trips back to the hotels and to Nebraska Furniture Mart, Borsheim's and the airport. Even so, you are likely to find a car useful. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We have scheduled the meeting in 2002 and 2003 on the customary first Saturday in May. In 2001, however, the Civic is already booked on that Saturday, so we will meet on April 28. The Civic should fit our needs well on any weekend, since there will then be more than ample parking in nearby lots and garages as well as on streets. We will also be able to greatly enlarge the space we give exhibitors. So, overcoming my normal commercial reticence, I will see that you have a wide display of Berkshire products at the Civic that you can purchase . As a benchmark, in 1999 shareholders bought 3,059 pounds of See's candy, $16,155 of World Book Products, 1,928 pairs of Dexter shoes, 895 sets of Quikut knives, 1,752 golf balls with the Berkshire Hathaway logo and 3,446 items of Berkshire apparel. I know you can do better. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Last year, we also initiated the sale of at least eight fractions of Executive Jet aircraft. We will again have an array of models at the Omaha airport for your inspection on Saturday and Sunday. Ask an EJA representative at the Civic about viewing any of these planes. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dairy Queen will also be on hand at the Civic and again will donate all proceeds to the Children's Miracle Network. Last year we sold 4,586 Dilly&reg; bars, fudge bars and vanilla/orange bars. Additionally, GEICO will have a booth that will be staffed by a number of our top counselors from around the country, all of them ready to supply you with auto insurance quotes. In most cases, GEICO will be able to offer you a special shareholder's discount. Bring the details of your existing insurance, and check out whether we can save you some money. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Finally, Ajit Jain and his associates will be on hand to offer both no-commission annuities and a liability policy with jumbo limits of a size rarely available elsewhere. Talk to Ajit and learn how to protect yourself and your family against a $10 million judgment. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;NFM's newly remodeled complex, located on a 75-acre site on 72 nd Street between Dodge and Pacific, is open from 10 a.m. to 9 p.m. on weekdays and 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. on Saturdays and Sundays. This operation offers an unrivaled breadth of merchandise -- furniture, electronics, appliances, carpets and computers -- all at can't-be-beat prices. In 1999 NFM did more than $300 million of business at its 72 nd Street location, which in a metropolitan area of 675,000 is an absolute miracle. During the Thursday, April 27 to Monday, May 1 period, any shareholder presenting his or her meeting credential will receive a discount that is customarily given only to employees. We have offered this break to shareholders the last couple of years, and sales have been amazing. In last year's five-day "Berkshire Weekend," NFM's volume was $7.98 million, an increase of 26% from 1998 and 51% from 1997. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Borsheim's -- the largest jewelry store in the country except for Tiffany's Manhattan store -- will have two shareholder-only events. The first will be a champagne and dessert party from 6 p.m.-10 p.m. on Friday, April 28. The second, the main gala, will be from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. on Sunday, April 30. On that day, Charlie and I will be on hand to sign sales tickets . Shareholder prices will be available Thursday through Monday, so if you wish to avoid the largest crowds, which will form on Friday evening and Sunday, come at other times and identify yourself as a shareholder. On Saturday, we will be open until 7 p.m. Borsheim's operates on a gross margin that is fully twenty percentage points below that of its major rivals, so be prepared to be blown away by both our prices and selection. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the mall outside of Borsheim's, we will again have Bob Hamman -- the best bridge player the game has ever seen -- available to play with our shareholders on Sunday. We will also have a few other experts playing at additional tables. In 1999, we had more demand than tables, but we will cure that problem this year. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Patrick Wolff, twice US chess champion, will again be in the mall playing blindfolded against all comers. He tells me that he has never tried to play more than four games simultaneously while handicapped this way but might try to bump that limit to five or six this year. If you're a chess fan, take Patrick on -- but be sure to check his blindfold before your first move. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gorat's -- my favorite steakhouse -- will again be open exclusively for Berkshire shareholders on Sunday, April 30, and will be serving from 4 p.m. until about midnight. Please remember that you can't come to Gorat's on Sunday without a reservation. To make one, call 402-551-3733 on April 3 ( but not before ). If Sunday is sold out, try Gorat's on one of the other evenings you will be in town. I make a "quality check" of Gorat's about once a week and can report that their rare T-bone (with a double order of hash browns) is still unequaled throughout the country. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The usual baseball game will be held at Rosenblatt Stadium at 7 p.m. on Saturday night. This year the Omaha Golden Spikes will play the Iowa Cubs. Come early, because that's when the real action takes place. Those who attended last year saw your Chairman pitch to Ernie Banks. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This encounter proved to be the titanic duel that the sports world had long awaited. After the first few pitches -- which were not my best, but when have I ever thrown my best? -- I fired a brushback at Ernie just to let him know who was in command. Ernie charged the mound, and I charged the plate. But a clash was avoided because we became exhausted before reaching each other. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ernie was dissatisfied with his performance last year and has been studying the game films all winter. As you may know, Ernie had 512 home runs in his career as a Cub. Now that he has spotted telltale weaknesses in my delivery, he expects to get #513 on April 29. I, however, have learned new ways to disguise my "flutterball." Come and watch this matchup. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I should add that I have extracted a promise from Ernie that he will not hit a "come-backer" at me since I would never be able to duck in time to avoid it. My reflexes are like Woody Allen's, who said his were so slow that he was once hit by a car being pushed by two guys. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Our proxy statement contains instructions about obtaining tickets to the game and also a large quantity of other information that should help you enjoy your visit in Omaha. Join us at the Capitalist Caper on Capitol Avenue. March 1, 2000 Warren E. Buffett Chairman of the Board

【中文】

# 1999年巴菲特致股东的信

---

## 原文对照

### 致伯克希尔·哈撒韦全体股东

**【中文翻译】**
致伯克希尔·哈撒韦公司的全体股东：

---

伯克希尔.哈撒韦公司全体股东：
本公司1999年的账面价值增加3.58亿美元，A/B股每股账面价值增长0.5%（标普500指数 同期涨幅为21%）。自现任管理层接手以来的35年间，每股账面价值从当初的19美元成长至如今的37987美元，年复合增长率约为24.0%。我们在1999年的表现相当糟糕。论绝对收益，是自1964年以来最差；与标普500指数相比的相对收益，也是自1964年以来最差。 相比绝对收益，我们更关心相对收益。随着时间的推移，糟糕的相对收益不可能产生令人满意的绝对收益。就连糊涂大侦探也能找到去年糟糕表现的罪魁祸首——没错，就是你们的董事长。我看着自己的成绩单，就像得了四个F和一个D的学生，听到善解人意的老师说：“孩子，你只是有点偏科。”
我偏的这一科是资本配置，1999年我在资本配置上的成绩肯定是D。这一年，伯克希尔股票投资组合的表现让人伤心。其中只有很少量是盖可保险的路易斯·辛普森管理的，其他都是我的责任。我们最大的几只重仓股在1999年的表现，全部严重落后于市场平均水平，背后的原因是它们的经营业绩令人失望了。我们仍然喜欢这些业务，并愿意继续持有，只是它们的经营受挫严重影响到我们1999年的表现。而且，现在我们还不能确定，它们什么时候能够恢复状态。我们1999年业绩不佳的直接后果就是股价大跌。1998年伯克希尔股价表现超过了企业经营水平，而1999年股价表现则落后于企业经营，这种落后一直持续到这封信与你见面的时刻。当然，我们相信，随着时间的推移，股价最终必然会与企业经营表现大致相当的。尽管我们去年表现不佳，但查理和我预计未来十年伯克希尔内在价值的增长，将会略超标普500指数收益。当然，我们不能写保证，但我们用自己的钱来下注这种信念。你知道的，我99%以上的净资产在伯克希尔。我和妻子从未出售过伯克希尔的股票。未来除非我们穷得过不下去了，否则依然不会考虑卖出1股伯克希尔股票。请注意，我谈到的目标是“略超”标普500。对伯克希尔来说，能够大幅超越指数的时段已经成为历史。当初之所以能取得那样的优异成绩，主要是因为当时企业与股票价格都相当低廉，而我们的资本规模相对较小，这让我们拥有比现在更多的投资机会可供选择。
我们对伯克希尔业绩能超过标普500的信心，还来自我的一个预期，我几乎可以100%确定，标普500指数在未来十年或二十年的表现，将远不如1982年以来的表现。《财富》杂志最近的一篇文章表达了我的观点，解释了这为什么是不可避免的。 年报后也附上了这份文章供大家参考。
我们的核心目标是经营好现有事业——这对旗下优秀的管理层而言并非难事，同时努力寻找具备相同竞争优势与优秀经理人的新事业。 去年我们在这方面取得了重大进展，不仅收购了乔丹家具（Jordan），还签约买下了中美能源的大部分股权。报告后半段我会详细介绍这两家公司，在此需要强调的是，这两项并购案伯克希尔均以现金完成交易，未发行任何新股。尽管这种交易方式可遇不可求，但却是查理与我更为偏好的选择。
内在价值简介
接下来，我想谈谈常被提及的“内在价值”概念。这是我们进行企业并购与股票投资时极为重要，但又难以精准界定的标准（关于这一议题及其他投资、会计名词的详细讨论，可参阅股东手册）。
在过去四年的年报中，我们提供了一张我们认为最能估算伯克希尔内在价值的表格。今年更新后的表格中，我们以拟制方式将通用再保险的数字纳入其中，即假设该公司自年度伊始便为我们所拥有。表格第一栏为每股投资金额（包括现金及类现金资产，但扣除财务子公司持有的证券）；第二栏为每股在扣除利息与经营费用后，伯克希尔来自本业的经营收益（未扣除所得税与购买法会计调整数）。需要说明的是，后者已扣除所有来自第一栏投资所贡献的股利收入、利息收入与资本利得。事实上，这张表格相当于将伯克希尔拆分为两部分：一部分是持有我们投资组合的控股公司，另一部分是经营旗下所有事业、承担全部成本与盈亏的营利事业。
EJA还享有另一项重要优势：它的两家主要竞争对手均是国际飞机制造业者的子公司，因此它们被迫只能提供母公司制造的飞机。在收购乔丹家具的过程中，我们选择了能让伯克希尔股东未来现金流量最大化、但报告收益最小化的交易方式：伯克希尔决定以现金收购资产。这一决策使得我们能够在15年的商誉摊销期内享受税收抵减优惠，而减税带来的直接效益，就是让公司未来几年的现金流量显著增加。相较之下，采用股票进行并购则无法获得这一优势——一次性冲销的商誉损失无法用于抵税，两种交易方式的经济实质差异极为明显。
从并购方的经济利益角度来看，最不划算的交易方式便是以股换股：不仅无法获得任何税收优惠，买方还需支付高额并购溢价；更糟糕的是，若买方日后出售这家公司，即便实际承受了巨额经济损失，出售方仍需缴纳高额资本利得税（税率往往高达35%以上）。
不过，伯克希尔也曾采用过非税收最优化的交易方式，主要原因是卖方基于特定考量坚持要求。当然，我们认为这类交易安排总体而言仍属合理，但我们绝不会为了美化账面数字而牺牲任何税收利益。
报告收益的来源
下表展示了伯克希尔报告收益的主要来源。在这张表格中，商誉摊销数与购买法会计调整数会从个别被投资公司的收益中分离出来，单独汇总列示。之所以这样处理，是为了让旗下各事业的收益状况不受我们投资行为的影响。过去我曾多次强调，相较于美国公认会计原则要求的按个别企业基础调整，这种表达方式对投资者和管理者而言更具参考价值，当然，最终的损益汇总数字仍与经会计师审计的结果保持一致。

回顾1999年，我们旗下制造、零售...

--------
搜索关键词：巴菲特致股东的信 1999 gelonghui

网页标题：中国经济网

网页链接：http://www.ce.cn/zhuanti/caijing/gushi/bafeite/b1999.htm

网页内容：巴菲特写给股东的信 (一九九九年)度
BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY INC.
波克夏海瑟崴股份有限公司
To the Shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway Inc.:
致所有股东:
Our gain in net worth during 1999 was $358 million, which increased
the per-share book value of both our Class A and Class B stock by 0.5%.
Over the last 35 years (that is, since present management took over)
per-share book value has grown from $19 to $37,987, a rate of 24.0%
compounded annually.*
本公司1999年的净值增加了3.58亿美元，每股A股或B股的账面净值皆成长
了0.5%，累计过去35年以来，也就是自从现有经营阶层接手之后，每股净值
由当初的19元成长到现在的37,987美元，年复合成长率约为24.0%*。
*All figures used in this report apply to Berkshire's A shares, the successor to the only stock that
the company had outstanding before 1996. The B shares have an economic interest equal to
1/30th that of the A.
*1在年报中所谓的每股数字系以A级普通股约当数为基础，这是本公司在1996年以前流通在
外唯一的一种股份，B级普通股则拥有A级普通股三十分之一的权利。
The numbers on the facing page show just how poor our 1999 record
was. We had the worst absolute performance of my tenure and,
compared to the S\u0026P, the worst relative performance as well. Relative
results are what concern us: Over time, bad relative numbers will
produce unsatisfactory absolute results.
首页上的数字完全显示出我们1999年的成绩是如何的不理想，这也是个人历年
来表现最差的一年，不管从绝对数字或是与S\u0026P 指数比较皆是如此，当然相对
数字是我们比较在意的，只不过时间一久，相对较差的数字其绝对数值肯定也不
会理想到哪里去。
Even Inspector Clouseau could find last year's guilty party: your
Chairman. My performance reminds me of the quarterback whose
report card showed four Fs and a D but who nonetheless had an
understanding coach. \"Son,\" he drawled, \"I think you're spending too
much time on that one subject.\"
即使是顽皮豹探长也知道谁是去年真正的犯人︰没错! 就是我本人，而我个人的
表现让我想起一位成绩单上满是F跟一个D的四分卫，偏偏又遇到一个体谅人
的教练轻声说到：「孩子，我想你把太多的时间摆在单一的科目之上了。」
My \"one subject\" is capital allocation, and my grade for 1999 most
assuredly is a D. What most hurt us during the year was the inferior
performance of Berkshire's equity portfolio -- and responsibility for
that portfolio, leaving aside the small piece of it run by Lou Simpson of
GEICO, is entirely mine. Several of our largest investees badly lagged the
market in 1999 because they've had disappointing operating results. We
still like these businesses and are content to have major investments in
them. But their stumbles damaged our performance last year, and it's no
sure thing that they will quickly regain their stride.
我所指的单一科目就是\"资金的分配\"，而很显然的我在1999年所获得的成绩就
只有D，除此之外表现最惨的要算是Berkshire的股票投资组合了，至于该为这
件事负责的，除了少部份的投资是由GEICO公司的Lou Simpson管理外，其
余全部都要归咎于我本人，我们几件大型的投资标的，由于本身1999年的经营
情况不佳，导致公司股价表现远落后于大盘，不过我们仍然对它们所处的产业情
有独钟，同时也愿意继续与它们同在，只是它们的挫败严重影响到我们去年的表
现，而且也不确定何时才能够回归正轨。
The fallout from our weak results in 1999 was a more-than-
commensurate drop in our stock price. In 1998, to go back a bit, the
stock outperformed the business. Last year the business did much
better than the stock, a divergence that has continued to the date of this
letter. Over time, of course, the performance of the stock must roughly
match the performance of the business.
Berkshire 1999年积弱不振的表现，更导致公司的股价大幅下滑，相较之下，
1998年的股价反而表现的比本业还好，去年可说是刚好相反，直到年报发布之
日止仍是如此，当然就长期而言，公司股价的表现大致上还是会与本业的表现相
当。
Despite our poor showing last year, Charlie Munger, Berkshire's Vice
Chairman and my partner, and I expect that the gain in Berkshire's
intrinsic value over the next decade will modestly exceed the gain from
owning the S\u0026P. We can't guarantee that, of course. But we are willing to
back our conviction with our own money. To repeat a fact you've heard
before, well over 99% of my net worth resides in Berkshire. Neither my
wife nor I have ever sold a share of Berkshire and -- unless our checks
stop clearing -- we have no intention of doing so.
尽管去年表现不佳，不过Berkshire 主要的合伙人-查理孟格，跟我本人仍然预
期Berkshire未来十年实质价值的成长率应该可以略微超越S\u0026P 指数同期的表
现，当然这种事没人敢打包票，不过我们依旧愿意以我们所有的身家作为担保，
大家应该都知道，我个人的身家有99%以上都摆在Berkshire，我跟我内人从来
就没有卖过一张Berkshire的股票，而且除非哪一天真的不够钱花，否则我们永
远不会考虑出售任何一张股票。
Please note that I spoke of hoping to beat the S\u0026P \"modestly.\" For
Berkshire, truly large superiorities over that index are a thing of the
past. They existed then because we could buy both businesses and
stocks at far more attractive prices than we can now, and also because
we then had a much smaller capital base, a situation that allowed us to
consider a much wider range of investment opportunities than are
available to us today.
请注意我说的是\"...
此外我之所以对Berkshire未来的表现如此有信心的原因在于，我认为S\u0026P在
included in the earnings we show in the table.

--------
搜索关键词：巴菲特致股东的信 1999 gelonghui

网页标题：1999年巴菲特致股东信:我们只会继续坚持我们能理解的东西-伯克希尔-哈撒韦(BRK.A)股吧-实时行情分析讨论-新浪财经

网页链接：https://guba.sina.cn/view_25471_17843.html

发布时间：2025-03-16T21:27:00+08:00

网页内容：狮子独角兽zl
2025-03-16 21:27
1999年巴菲特致股东信：我们只会继续坚持我们能理解的东西
1999年标普500指数从年初的1229点涨至1469点，加上发放的红利，指数收益率为21%。然而伯克希尔在这一年仅取得0.5%的投资收益率，大幅落后于指数。伯克希尔的股价逆势大跌20%至56100美元。
曾经的股神在1999年遭遇了滑铁卢，伯克希尔投资收益率大幅落后于标普500指数。巴菲特在这一年的致股东信中狠狠地自嘲了一番。这一年是美国股市集体狂欢的时刻，是科技股大放异彩的时刻，市场上到处都是暴富的神话，人们开始嘲笑巴菲特老了，《时代》周刊说“这也许是一个任何人都比巴菲特聪明的年代”，《纽约时报》刊发封面人物文章《沃伦，你怎么了？》，如此这般，数不胜数。然而就在老巴这封致股东信发出后的第10天，股市风云突变，科技股伴随着纳斯达克指数暴跌，指数持续跌了两年，跌掉了78%之多。而伯克希尔的股价却在那天迎来了反转。姜还是老的辣，股神还是股神，你大爷还是你大爷。
巴菲特在这一年的致股东信中再次提到了能力圈的重要性：
“如果说我们有什么优势，那就是能够意识到自己只有在能力范围内活动才能过得不错，以及哪里是我们无法突破的能力范围边界。对那些急剧变化的行业和公司的未来做预测，就超出了我们的能力范围。如果有其他人声称他们在这些行业有预测能力，同时他们的说法还被股价表现所证实，我们也不会羡慕他们，更加不会去模仿。相反，我们只会继续坚持我们能理解的东西。
如果我们犯了错，那也只会是不小心导致的错误，而不是我们因为羡慕别人的收益而导致的内心焦躁不安，或用希望代替理性的结果。幸运的是，几乎可以肯定，在我们圈定的能力范围内，伯克希尔照样经常有表现出色的机会。”
老巴告诫我们，做投资一定要始终守在自己的能力圈内，不懂不做。能力圈是投资的基本理念之一，其最重要的就是要清晰地知道自己能力圈的边界在哪里，这比能力圈本身的大小更为重要。优秀的投资者大多固守在自己的能力圈内，但有些投资者却时常喜欢蹦出能力圈外，尝试一些新的东西，而这些新东西往往都处于雷区，让投资者血本无归。

--------
搜索关键词：巴菲特致股东的信 1999 gelonghui

网页标题：1999年巴菲特致股东的信(下) 会计问题--第一部分我们与通用再保之间的并购案反映出会计准则一直以来存在的一个重大瑕疵，眼尖的股东在阅读合并相关的股东会...

网页链接：https://xueqiu.com/6217262310/133926005

发布时间：2020-02-23T19:28:00+08:00

网页内容：1999年巴菲特致股东的信（下）
陈忠良投资笔记
2020-02-23 19:28
会计问题--第一部分
我们与通用再保之间的并购案反映出会计准则一直以来存在的一个重大瑕疵，眼尖的股东在阅读合并相关的股东会文件时，应该都会发现其中有一项不寻常的项目，在拟制性的损益表中，清楚仿真出如果两者1997年的盈余合并后会是怎么的结果，其中有一项薪资酬劳费用因为合并而增加了6,300万美元。
这个项目我必须特别强调的是并不代表查理和我的个性有任何重大的改变(他还是一样搭乘长途巴士出差，并以富兰克林的名字订位)，同时也不表示通用再保本身的会计政策有何疏失之处，该公司业已完全依照一般公认会计准则运作，实际的情形是我们特别要求通用再保将原先发给员工的期权全部以等值的现金奖励取代，在此之前与这些经理人本身权益息息相关的是公司的股价，在此之后，他们可以领到的报酬完全要看他们各自负责单位的绩效表现。
新的计划与先前的期权计划对公司员工来说具有相同的效益，也就是说在相同的表现之下，公司给予员工同样的报酬奖励，只不过原先大家预期可以获得的股票将会改以现金取代，(至于先前已经发放的期权则继续保持流通在外)。
虽然两项计划在经济实质上相当，但我们改采的现金奖励计划在会计账面上却相当不利，这种爱丽丝梦游仙境的结果主要起源于会计准则在计算公司盈利时，根本上忽略期权的成本，虽然在许多大企业员工期权早已成为公司庞大的成本负担，事实上，会计准则给予公司经理人一个相当弹性的空间，若你以这种形式给予员工报酬，就必须计入成本，但若你以另一种形式给予员工报酬，就不必计入成本，也难怪员工期权已经到了过度泛滥的地步，一面倒地采用这种方式使得公司的股东权益大大受损，虽然我承认期权若能够好好的规划，有时候是可以成为一种补偿同时激励高阶经理人的好方法，只是大部分的时候，他们通常过于慷慨，严重损及原有股东的利益，并不适合作为一项好的激励工具。
不过不管期权到底有怎样的优点，有关它们的会计处理原则实在是太离谱，试想今年我们预计投入1.9亿美元在盖可汽车保险的广告之上，假若我们不支付现金而改以同等价值的伯克希尔股票期权作为给予厂商的对价，那么有没有人会跳出来说伯克希尔的广告怎么就可以不花一毛钱，难道它不应该反应在公司的会计账簿之上吗?
或许Berkeley主教(大家或许还记得他曾经提到一棵倒在无人迹深山中的大树的笑话)，会真的相信会计师没有发现的成本就代表它不存在，不过要查理和我接受这样的概念实在是有点困难，当我们考虑要投资一家有发行期权的公司，我们会先将这家公司的盈利能力向下修正，直接扣除若对外公开发行这些期权所能得到的对价，同样的，要是我们准备要并购一家公司时，我们也会将更换原有期权的成本列入考虑，然后等到合并案正式通过后，我们会立即将相关成本反应在会计账上。
不同意我对期权看法的读者这时可能会抗议我将发给员工期权的成本跟对外公开发行的股票期权划上等号，没有错，在这些争辩中，员工的期权有时会被没收，使得股东权益受损的程度有可能会减小，公开发行的期权就没有这项优点，而员工在行使期权时，公司也可因而获得抵税权，公开发行的期权也没有这项好处，但是在另外一方面，员工期权的转换价格常常会做修正，比起公开发行的期权来说，所付出的代价更为高昂。
也有人认为限制转移的员工期权其价值对于员工来说，比没有可以公开交易的期权来得低，但这种讲法并没有办法淡化公司发行期权给员工所需付出的代价，就像是公司配给员工的配车，虽然限制员工只能作为公务使用，但是这并不代表公司就可以不必花钱买车。
而查理和我在对这类期权所作的盈余修正通常会在5%以上，而就算是10%以上的幅度也不会令人感到意外，有时调整的幅度甚至大到影响我们的投资决策，有时更因此被迫要将持股卖出或是放弃买进原先看上的投资标的。
几年前，我们就曾提出至今还没有得到解答的三个问题：“如果期权不算是一种报酬的话，那它又算是什么?而如果给予员工的报酬不算是一种费用的话?那它又算是什么?而如果费用不必列入损益表计算盈余的话，那么又应该把它们摆到哪里去呢?”
会计问题-第二部分
管理阶层在员工认股期权会计问题上所扮演的角色绝对不能马虎，最近有一群公司主管与会计师极力反对美国财务会计准则委员会打算将原先不实的期权予以更正，但结果却没有人公开表示支持，反对者甚至动员国会议员参与游说，将这种虚增盈余的议题提升到国家利益的层次。
此外，我认为有些管理当局在公司再造与合并的会计处理上的心态更为可疑，很多管理当局刻意操纵损益，欺骗投资人，而就像Michael Kinsley曾经批评华府的\"真正的丑闻不是那些违反法律的，而是那些完全合法的行为\"。
在以前透过财务报表，很容易可以分辨一家公司的好坏，但时至60年代后期，却掀起一波骗子称之为\"大胆且富想象力的会计\"的热潮，(这种做法在当时受到华尔街人士的热烈欢迎，因为他们从来都不会让人失望)，不过在当时大家都知道谁是老千，至于一般受到崇敬的美国大公司基本上都洁身自好，相当爱惜自己的羽毛。
只是近年来，道德逐渐沦丧，虽然许多大企业还是开大门走大路，不过却有越来越多所谓高格调的经理人，(就是那种你想要把女儿许配给他或请他担任遗嘱执行人的人)，渐渐认为玩弄数字以符合华尔街预期的做法没有什么大不了的，没错，有许多经理人不但觉得这类操纵数字的行为很正常，甚至是他们的工作责任之一。
这些经理人一开始往往就认定他们的主要工作之一是让公司的股价越高越好，(关于这点我们实在不敢苟同)，而为了撑高股价，他们可以说是无所不用其极地在公司营运上冲刺，只是当公司营运结果不若预期时，他们自然而然地会想到运用不当的会计手法，不是\"制造\"出想要的盈余数字，就是预埋伏笔，在未来的盈余做手脚。
而为了让这样的行为合理化，这些经理人常常表示如果公司股票的价格不能合理反应其价值，则公司股东的权益将会受损，同时他们也声称运用会计骗...

========
搜索关键词：巴菲特致股东的信 1995 gelonghui

网页标题：一文速览 | 巴菲特致股东信最全版(1957-2025)，读完你就通透了!

网页链接：https://m.gelonghui.com/p/3167149

网页内容：一文速览 | 巴菲特致股东信最全版（1957-2025），读完你就通透了！
原创 5 个月前
 29.3k
股神60年传奇投资生涯启示录
每年，“股神”沃伦·巴菲特都会给伯克希尔·哈撒韦股东写一封公开信。
在过去的几十年里，这些信件已经成为投资界的年度必读资料，让人们得以深入了解，巴菲特和他的团队如何思考从投资策略到股票所有权到公司文化等一切问题。
这些信件内容将巴菲特过去一年的投资思想展现得淋漓尽致，成为投资经典。
或许，我们难以复制股神巴菲特的投资成功之路 ，但我们却可以从中学到一些方法和理念，让我们在投资理财时少走弯路。
本文整理了巴菲特1957年-2025年致股东信，并附有英文版全文（文末PDF），刊飨在格隆汇网站，希望对各位朋友们有所帮助。
1957年巴菲特致股东的信
1958年巴菲特致股东的信
1959年巴菲特致股东的信
1960年巴菲特致股东的信
1961年巴菲特致股东的信
1962年巴菲特致股东的信
1963年巴菲特致股东的信
1964年巴菲特致股东的信
1965年巴菲特致股东的信
1966年巴菲特致股东的信
1967年巴菲特致股东的信
1968年巴菲特致股东的信
1969年巴菲特致股东的信
1971年巴菲特致股东的信
1972年巴菲特致股东的信
1973年巴菲特致股东的信
1974年巴菲特致股东的信
1975年巴菲特致股东的信
1976年巴菲特致股东的信
1977年巴菲特致股东的信
1978年巴菲特致股东的信
1979年巴菲特致股东的信
1980年巴菲特致股东的信
1981年巴菲特致股东的信
1982年巴菲特致股东的信
1983年巴菲特致股东的信
1984年巴菲特致股东的信
1985年巴菲特致股东的信
1986年巴菲特致股东的信
1987年巴菲特致股东的信
1988年巴菲特致股东的信
1989年巴菲特致股东的信
1990年巴菲特致股东的信
1991年巴菲特致股东的信
1992年巴菲特致股东的信
1993年巴菲特致股东的信
1994年巴菲特致股东的信
1995年巴菲特致股东的信
1996年巴菲特致股东的信
1997年巴菲特致股东的信
1998年巴菲特致股东的信
1999年巴菲特致股东的信
2000年巴菲特致股东的信
2001年巴菲特致股东的信
2002年巴菲特致股东的信
2003年巴菲特致股东的信
2004年巴菲特致股东的信
2005年巴菲特致股东的信
2006年巴菲特致股东的信
2007年巴菲特致股东的信
2008年巴菲特致股东的信
2009年巴菲特致股东的信
2010年巴菲特致股东的信
2011年巴菲特致股东的信
2012年巴菲特致股东的信
2013年巴菲特致股东的信
2014年巴菲特致股东的信
2015年巴菲特致股东的信
2016年巴菲特致股东的信
2017年巴菲特致股东的信
2018年巴菲特致股东的信
2019年巴菲特致股东的信
2020年巴菲特致股东的信
2021年巴菲特致股东的信
2022年巴菲特致股东的信
2023年巴菲特致股东的信
2024年巴菲特致股东的信
2025年巴菲特致股东的信
张利

--------
搜索关键词：巴菲特致股东的信 1995 gelonghui

网页标题：巴菲特1995年致股东的信-上 致伯克希尔.哈撒韦公司全体股东:1995年，本公司的账面价值增加了53亿美元，增幅达45%。不过，由于去年通过发行股份的...

网页链接：https://xueqiu.com/3306688928/372871535

发布时间：2026-01-25T10:37:00+08:00

网页内容：巴菲特1995年致股东的信-上
恒理研院
2026-01-25 10:37
致伯克希尔.哈撒韦公司全体股东：
1995年，本公司的账面价值增加了53亿美元，增幅达45%。不过，由于去年通过发行股份的方式并购了两家公司，导致发行在外的股份增加了1.3%，因此每股账面价值增长率为43.1%（同期标普指数增长率为37.6%）。自现任管理层接手以来的31年里，每股账面价值从当初的19美元增长至如今的14,426美元，年复合增长率约为23.6%。
其实，1995年能取得这样的成绩，并没有什么值得太过欣喜的。在去年那样的股票市场环境下，任何一个投资者都能轻易在市场中有所收获，我们自然也不例外。用肯尼迪总统的话说，这就是“水涨船高”。
抛开亮眼的财务数据，1995年对伯克希尔而言，还有许多令人振奋的好消息——我们成功达成了三笔渴望已久的公司并购交易。其中，Helzberg钻石店与R.C.Willey家具店已纳入伯克希尔1995年的财务报表；而规模最大的一笔交易，是并购盖可保险剩余的全部股权，该交易在年末顺利完成（三笔并购的详细情况将在后文阐述）。
这些新加入的子公司，将使我们的营收翻倍，但并购后公司流通在外的股份及负债并未大幅增加。此外，尽管这三家公司合计拥有11,000名员工，我们总部的人员却仅从11人增至12人，并未因大规模并购而盲目扩张。
查理和我一直致力于建立一个拥有绝佳竞争优势，并由杰出经理人领导的企业所组成的集团，其中有些企业是持有全部股权，有些企业只持有部分股权。我们最希望的方式是通过协商，以合理的价格取得一家公司的全部股权。不过，如果我们在股市中找到机会，能够以低于收购整家公司所须支付的每股股份，买入一家好公司的一部分股份，我们也非常开心。
事实上，这种双管齐下——既通过协议收购整家公司，也通过股市买入部分股份——的做法，使我们比其他坚持单一路线的投资者更有优势。伍迪·艾伦曾经解释过世上为什么会存在折中主义。他说：“双性恋者最大的优势在于，周末约会的机会多了一倍。”多年来，我们一直像伍迪那样思考，在努力增加我们拥有的优质企业股份数量的同时，也试着整体收购一些同样优秀的企业。
下面这张表是以十年为视角，观察伯克希尔每股证券投资金额及剔除投资后的经营盈利变化数据。
在并购市场中，这样的“跛脚马”常常被包装成“宝马”行骗。
在伯克希尔，我们无从知晓其他有意并购的公司为何会做出不理性的决策。和他们一样，我们也面临一个先天问题：卖方永远比买方更了解公司内情，因此他们必然会选择在最有利的时机卖出——也就是当“跛脚马”表现正常的时候。
尽管如此，我们仍具备几项优势。其中最关键的一点是，我们没有所谓的“战略计划”，因此无需遵循固定模式（这种模式几乎注定会以离谱的价格成交），而是完全以股东利益为首要考量。在这种心态下，我们可以客观地将并购案与其他几十种潜在投资机会进行比较，包括通过股票市场买进优质公司的部分股权。我们习惯性地在“并购”与“被动投资”之间做权衡，这是那些一心想要扩张经营版图的经理人很少能做到的。
管理大师彼得・德鲁克几年前在接受《时代》杂志专访时，精准地指出：“让我告诉你一个秘密，促成交易比埋头苦干好，促成交易刺激有趣，而工作却尽是一些麻烦事。”经营任何事业都难免要面对繁杂的事务，而促成交易则相对“浪漫”，这也是许多交易毫无道理可循的原因。
在并购案中，我们还有另一项优势：付款方式灵活，可向卖方提供由众多优秀企业组成的伯克希尔股份作为对价。当一家公司的老板或家族想要出售绩优的家族产业，且希望相关税负能继续递延时，伯克希尔的股票会是绝佳选择。事实上，我相信这一考量在我们1995年促成的两项并购案中，发挥了重要作用。
此外，有些卖方会关心公司能否找到一个稳定可靠的“归宿”，让经理人拥有良好的工作环境。在这一点上，伯克希尔绝对与众不同：我们旗下事业的经理人拥有绝对的自主权，且我们的股权结构能让卖方相信，并购时做出的每一个承诺都会被信守。对我们而言，也希望与真正关心公司与员工的卖主打交道。根据我们的经验，与这类卖家合作，通常比与那些一心只想拍卖公司的人合作，更少出现令人不愉快的意外。
以上是对我们并购风格的简要说明，同时也想在此“打个广告”：如果你拥有或代表一家每年税前收益超过2,500万美元的公司，且符合我们后文列出的各项并购标准，欢迎与我联系。我们的谈话内容将完全保密；即便你目前没有兴趣，也请记住我们的提议——我们始终对收购拥有优良竞争优势与杰出经理人的公司抱有浓厚兴趣。
我忍不住要给大家分享一个故事，一位公司高管去年给我讲的关于并购的故事。
他原本管理的企业非常棒，在行业中一直处于领导地位。不过，企业的核心产品平平无奇，没有什么让人眼前一亮的魅力。正因为此，公司在几十年前雇用了一家管理咨询公司。很自然地，咨询公司建议公司多元化，这是当时的潮流。聚焦主业的说法在那时还不流行。后来，该公司陆续收购了好些企业。每次收购前，都投入重金请这家咨询公司详尽调查，并出具了专业的可行性研究报告。
你一定和我一样，很想知道结果。这位高管悲伤地说：“收购前，我们的净利润100%来自主营业务。十年后，主营业务实现了公司年度净利润的150%。”
赫尔兹伯格钻石公司
几年前，管理顾问...
R.C.Willey有着一段精彩的发展历程。在将盖可保险变成我们的全资子公司后，我们的保险浮存金马上会增加近30亿美元，而且展望未来，这个数字几乎肯定会继续增长。（注：华尔街对于巴菲特通过私下协议获得如此优厚的优先股颇有微词，但实际上，这些公司当时都面临着不同的困境，巴菲特带来的不仅是资金，还有伯克希尔的信用以及个人的管理与投资建议。）

--------
搜索关键词：巴菲特致股东的信 1995 gelonghui

网页标题：中国经济网

网页链接：http://www.ce.cn/zhuanti/caijing/gushi/bafeite/b1995.htm

网页内容：巴菲特写给股东的信 (一九九五年)度
1995 ................ 22,088 258.20
让我失望过，大家必须了解如果没有戴维在1951年那个寒冷的星期六慷慨解
Insurance Operations
保险事业营运
In addition to acquiring GEICO, we enjoyed other favorable
developments in insurance during 1995.
除了取得GEICO保险公司全部的股权，1995年我们其它保险事业也都有相当
不错的发展。
As we've explained in past reports, what counts in our
insurance business is, first, the amount of \"float\" we generate
and, second, its cost to us. Float is money we hold but don't
own. In an insurance operation, float arises because most
policies require that premiums be prepaid and, more importantly,
because it usually takes time for an insurer to hear about and
resolve loss claims.
就像我们在过去年报跟各位解释过的，保险事业最重要的关键，第一是保险浮存
金的数量，第二是它的成本，浮存金是我们持有并非我们所有，保险事业营运之
所以能有浮存金的原因在于大部分的保单都会要求保户必须预付保险费，另外更
重要的是保险公司在被知会并真正理赔之前，通常都要经过好长的一段时间。
Typically, the premiums that an insurer takes in do not
cover the losses and expenses it must pay. That leaves it
running an \"underwriting loss\" - and that loss is the cost of
float. An insurance business is profitable over time if its cost
of float is less than the cost the company would otherwise incur
to obtain funds. But the business has a negative value if the
cost of its float is higher than market rates for money.
通常保险公司实际上收到的保费并不足以支应实际发生的损失与费用，所以大多
会产生承保的损失，而这就是浮存金的成本，长期而言，保险公司的浮存金成本
若能低于其它资金管道所需的成本就算是获利，但是要是其浮存金成本高于货币
市场利率的话，其是否有存在的价值就有疑问。
As the numbers in the following table show, Berkshire's
insurance business has been a huge winner. For the table, we
have calculated our float - which we generate in exceptional
amounts relative to our premium volume - by adding loss reserves,
loss adjustment reserves, funds held under reinsurance assumed
and unearned premium reserves, and then subtracting agents'
balances, prepaid acquisition costs, prepaid taxes and deferred
charges applicable to assumed reinsurance. Our cost of float is
determined by our underwriting loss or profit. In those years
when we have had an underwriting profit, such as the last three,
our cost of float has been negative, which means we have
calculated our insurance earnings by adding underwriting profit
to float income.
如同下表中的数字所显示的，Berkshire的保险事业大获全胜，表中的浮存金，
系将所有的损失准备、损失费用调整准备与未赚取保费加总后，再扣除应付佣
金、预付购并成本及相关再保递延费用，相对于我们的保费收入总额，我们的浮
存金部位算是相当大的，至于浮存金的成本则决定于所发生的承保损失或利益而
定，在某些年度由于我们有承保利益，所以换句话说，我们的资金成本甚至是负
的，此时我们的保险事业盈余等于是由原先从浮存金获取的利益再加上承保利
益。
(1) (2) Yearend Yield
Underwriting Approximate on Long-Term
Loss Average Float Cost of Funds Govt. Bonds
------------ ------------- --------------- -------------
(In $ Millions) (Ratio of 1 to 2)
low cost is that we have obtained float on very advantageous terms.
insurance business be aligned - on the downside as well as the
usual, a large amount of float compared to premium volume. Over
the last three years, this segment of our business, run by Don Wurster, has had an average combined ratio of 85.6. Our homestate
operation, managed by Rod Eldred, grew at a good rate in 1995 and
achieved a combined ratio of 81.4. Its three-year combined ratio
is an amazing 82.4. Berkshire's California workers' compensation
business, run by Brad Kinstler, faced fierce price-cutting in 1995
and lost a great many renewals when we refused to accept inadequate
rates. Though this operation's volume dropped materially, it
produced an excellent underwriting profit. Finally, John Kizer, at
Central States Indemnity, continues to do an extraordinary job.
His premium volume was up 23% in 1995, and underwriting profit grew
by 59%. Ajit, Don, Rod, Brad and John are all under 45, an
embarrassing fact demolishing my theory that managers only hit
their stride after they reach 70.
Berkshire其它的保险营运，虽然规模相对较小，但在1995年的表现却同样极
为出色，国家产物保险传统业务的综合比率只有84.2，同时以其保费收入来看，
还贡献了大量的浮存金，过去三年以来，这个由Don Wurster负责的部门平均
的综合比率只有85.6；另外由Rod Eldred负责的Homestate业务也有相当幅
度的成长，去年的综合比率更只有81.4，过去三年平均为82.4；由Brad负责
的加州劳工退休基金在1995年面对激烈的价格竞争，同时还因为拒绝不合理的
降价要求而失去续约的机会，虽然此举使得业务量大幅缩减，但整体的承保利益
仍然相当可观；最后负责中央州立产险公司营运的John则依然表现出色，1995
年的保费收入成长23%，承保利益更大幅增加59%，Ajit、Don、Rod、Brad
与John的年纪都在45岁以下，这种情况也让我以往认为经理人要到70之后
才能随心所欲的论点破功。
To sum up, we entered 1995 with an exceptional insurance
operation of moderate size. By adding GEICO, we entered 1996 with
a business still better in quality, much improved...
1995 by $625 million, minus the \"excess\" dividends of about $70
report. The company's results improved in 1995, but it still faces
级普通股，除非有股东有赠与的考量时，可能会将少部份的股份进行转换，而由
will be periods of underperformance as well. The price

--------
搜索关键词：巴菲特致股东的信 1995 gelonghui

网页标题：解读1995年巴菲特致股东的信

网页链接：https://www.360doc.cn/article/73258713_955489192.html

发布时间：2021-01-06T00:00:00+08:00

网页内容：解读1995年巴菲特致股东的信
北山读书 \u003e《价值投资》
2021.01.06
我们比较喜欢上下变动的15%，更甚于平淡无奇的12%。 ——巴菲特，1995
本年信看点：
1、巴菲特首次列示了从1965年至1995年每股证券市值和盈利的增长率，股票投资收益率惊人。很多公司并购行为都存在着欺骗和价值损害，伯克希尔在此方面反而具备三项优势。
2、在股权投资方面，花了23亿买下GEICO剩余50%股权，增持了部分美国运通，通过吸收合并将大都会持股转变为迪士尼。受益于大牛市，证券市值普遍大幅上涨。
3、在固定证券投资方面，有得有失。由于伯克希尔股价已高达3.6万美元一股，于是B股发行计划提上日程。
1995年致股东的信
公司业绩
当年标普500涨幅37.6%，伯克希尔增长43.1%，巴菲特超额收益5.5%。
肯尼迪总统说，一波大浪就可以撑起所有船。因为1995年是大牛市，大家收益都很好。用巴菲特常用的话是，大潮来了鸭子都能飘起来呱呱叫，但只有潮退后才知道谁在裸泳。
双管齐下的做法（通过谈判买下整家公司或是通过股市买进部份股权），使得我们比起其他坚持单一做法的资金分配者来说，拥有绝佳的优势。伍迪·艾伦曾解释过为什么折衷主义有效：“双性恋的真正优势在于它使你在星期六晚上约会的机会增加一倍。”
全部买下固然最好，但如果在二级市场能够便宜的买到部分股权也很好，都能增进价值。
前者更好是因为更可控，而巴菲特更在乎的是价值返还而不是控制经营。因此，并购了三家公司，营收翻了一倍，总部才 12个人。
巴菲特生动的诠释了什么是管资本，这个国资委其实应该好好学习学习。
\u003ctable\u003e
\u003ctr\u003e\u003ctd\u003eYear\u003c/td\u003e\u003ctd\u003eMarketable Securities Per Share\u003c/td\u003e\u003ctd\u003ePre-tax Earnings Per Share Excluding All Income from Investments\u003c/td\u003e\u003c/tr\u003e
\u003ctr\u003e\u003ctd\u003e1965\u003c/td\u003e\u003ctd\u003e$ 4\u003c/td\u003e\u003ctd\u003e$ 4.08\u003c/td\u003e\u003c/tr\u003e
\u003ctr\u003e\u003ctd\u003e1975\u003c/td\u003e\u003ctd\u003e159\u003c/td\u003e\u003ctd\u003e(6.48)\u003c/td\u003e\u003c/tr\u003e
\u003ctr\u003e\u003ctd\u003e1985\u003c/td\u003e\u003ctd\u003e2,443\u003c/td\u003e\u003ctd\u003e18.86\u003c/td\u003e\u003c/tr\u003e
\u003ctr\u003e\u003ctd\u003e1995\u003c/td\u003e\u003ctd\u003e22,088\u003c/td\u003e\u003ctd\u003e258.20\u003c/td\u003e\u003c/tr\u003e
\u003ctr\u003e\u003ctd\u003eYearly Growth Rate：1965-95\u003c/td\u003e\u003ctd\u003e33.4%\u003c/td\u003e\u003ctd\u003e14.7%\u003c/td\u003e\u003c/tr\u003e
\u003c/table\u003e
伯克希尔的每股有价证券在三十年间以惊人的33.4%的复利增长，远超过23.6%的净值复利，主要是旗下公司的利润复利仅14.7%，似乎拖了后腿。
但必须看到的是，正是有了旗下公司源源不断的给巴菲特提供了大量的弹药，才使得他能够在某些重要股票最低迷的时候大举加仓。旗下公司作为巴菲特的现金流和稳定剂，功不可没。随着这部分规模未来越来越大，作用也更加明显。
伯克希尔的成长历程有着极大的偶然性，都是因为市场低迷，低估的机会出现了，巴菲特把握住了，不断的扩大了其版图。
其核心原则一以贯之，即价值投资。
并购案
巴菲特说伯克希尔进行并有，拥有几项优势，其中最重要的是我们并没有战略规划。
毕竟只有当市场萧条时股价才会低迷，但市场萧条是偶然的不确定的，靠的是等待而不是规划。巴菲特成功就成功在 “等待”二字...
当年伯克希尔做了好几项并购。
一是Helzberg钻石店，以免税的股权交换方式进行。二是R.C. Willey家具店
第三项是最重大的收购GEICO
完成了对美国第七大汽车保险公司GEICO 100％股权的收购。
巴菲特动情的回忆了在读大学的时候有机会和GEICO的首次会面。
1951年大学毕业，巴菲特投入10282美元购买GEICO。到了年底，这些股票的市值成为13125美元，超过他个人净值的65%。
（当时股票经纪人推荐股票同时自己购买股票似乎并不违法违规，巴菲特太年轻了所以没人信服，推荐不成干脆自己买了，到年底净值就增长了 30% ）
1952年巴菲特以15259美元的价钱将全部的GEICO股份出清，一年时间赚了50%，也相当不错了，再买的股票也便宜的让人诧异，西部保险证券当时的股价略高于其当时盈利的一倍。
20年后被卖掉的1.5万美元的GEICO股份变成了130万美元，年均复利相当于25%，持续二十年，确实是一个很惊人的成长。
1970年代末，由于GEICO战略失误和经营失误，几乎倒闭，巴菲特难得买入了困境中的企业，庆幸的是管理层足够优秀得以反转。
1980累计投入4570万美元获得33.3%股份，公司持续回购股份变成了50%。1995年收购另外50%花费23亿美元，十五年中复利率约30%，真正优秀的公司确实具有长期价值。
同期GEICO的股价平均回报将近30%，远超S\u0026P指数和其投资绩效。市场对于长期高速增长的公司估值也不会吝啬。
GEICO能够成功的最重要关键，还在于超低的成本结构，这实在是其他竞争同业远远比不上的。保险事业
保险事业最重要的关键，第一是保险浮存金的数量，第二是它的成本。
任何一家公司的获利能力取决于：（1）资产回报率；（2）负债的成本；（3）财务杠杆的运用。
第二是程序便捷，巴菲特全权交给Ajit Jain等职业经理人，快速决策；
第三是也是因为有钱，所以别人最多能签4亿的保单，伯克希尔可以签下10亿。独此一家别无分号。
讲的再白一点，我们比较喜欢上下变动的 15%，更甚于平淡无奇的12% （we prefer a lumpy 15% to a smooth 12%）。正因为大部分的经理人倾向平淡，这使得我们长期回报最大化的目标享有绝对的竞争优势。

--------
搜索关键词：巴菲特致股东的信 1995 gelonghui

网页标题：Warren Buffett's Letters: 1995

网页链接：https://sgp.gurufocus.com/news/2019264/warren-buffetts-letters-1995

发布时间：2023-06-12T00:00:00+08:00

网页内容：Warren Buffett's Letters: 1995
Investment lessons from Berkshire Hathaway's letters to shareholders
Summary
Buffett says Berkshire doesn't have a strategic plan. This non-constrained investment style is actually a massive advantage.
Buffett is highly associated with Ben Graham, but Buffett has also keenly utilized Phil Fisher's \"scuttlebutt\" idea for gathering information.
Two investors I admire, Bill Ackman (Trades, Portfolio) and Whitney Tilson (Trades, Portfolio ), have recommended that to learn about investing, investors should read Berkshire Hathaway’s (BRK.A, Financial)(BRK.B, Financial) annual letters to shareholders. This series focuses on the main points Warren Buffett (Trades, Portfolio) makes in these letters and my analysis of the lessons learned from them. In this discussion, we cover the 1995 letter.
Acquisitions
Interestingly, in the 1995 shareholder letter, during the discussion on acquisitions, in which Berkshire made three that year, Buffett said he and Charlie Munger (Trades, Portfolio) were still skeptical about most deals, noting sellers and their representatives invariably present financial projections having more entertainment value than educational value and “in the production of rosy scenarios, Wall Street can hold its own against Washington.”
Buffett also highlighted that Berkshire is not immune from the buyer’s curse, in that it will always face the inherent problem that the seller of a business practically always knows far more about it than the buyer and the seller also picks the time of sale.
Despite this, Berkshire does have a few advantages when making acquisitions. He wrote:
\"...perhaps the greatest being that we don't have a strategic plan. Thus we feel no need to proceed in an ordained direction (a course leading almost invariably to silly purchase prices) but can instead simply decide what makes sense for our owners. In doing that, we always mentally compare any move we are contemplating with dozens of other opportunities open to us, including the purchase of small pieces of the best businesses in the world via the stock market. Our practice of making this comparison - acquisitions against passive investments - is a discipline that managers focused simply on expansion seldom use.\"
One of Berkshire’s strengths has been its unconstrained investment mandate. Even though the conglomerate's performance is often measured against the S\u0026P 500, we see Buffett invest globally, with no constraints on security type, industry or geographic exposure. The only problem he really faces is size, finding deals to move the needle. The perception is that he is just an accounting geek (which, OK, is probably true), reading 10-Ks and annual reports all day long. In fact, he uses the principle of “scuttlebutt,” which was defined by Phil Fisher. \"And thus I met Lorimer Davidson, Assistant to the President, who was later to become CEO. Though my only credentials were that I was a student of Graham's, 'Davy' graciously spent four hours or so showering me with both kindness and instruction. No one has ever received a better half-day course in how the insurance industry functions nor in the factors that enable one company to excel over others.\"
Buffett was 20 at the time. The point is, one of Buffett’s core strenghs has been his ability to network and learn about businesses by asking questions. Except for stock broking, Buffett did not have his own business experience other than fund management and, over time, board memberships of companies he acquired. Returning to Geico, Buffett reminded readers that any company's level of profitability is determined by three items: (1) what its assets earn; (2) what its liabilities cost; and (3) its utilization of \"leverage\" - that is, the degree to which its assets are funded by liabilities rather than by equity.
He said:
\"Over the years, we have done well on Point 1, having produced high returns on our assets. But we have also benefitted greatly - to a degree that is not generally well-understood - because our liabilities have cost us very little. An important reason for this low cost is that we have obtained float on very advantageous terms. The same cannot be said by many other property and casualty insurers, who may generate plenty of float, but at a cost that exceeds what the funds are worth to them. In those circumstances, leverage becomes a disadvantage.\"
Since Berkshire’s float cost it virtually nothing over the years, it has, in effect, served as equity, except it differs from true equity in that it doesn't belong to Berkshire.
Buffett provided an example to walk through this thinking:
\"Nevertheless, let’s assume that instead of our having $3.4 billion of float at the end of 1994, we had replaced it with $3.4 billion of equity. Under this scenario, we would have owned no more assets than we did during 1995. We would, however, have had somewhat lower earnings because the cost of float was negative last year. That is, our float threw off profits. And, of course, to obtain the replacement equity, we would have needed to sell many new shares of Berkshire. The net result – more shares, equal assets and lower earnings – would have materially reduced the value of our stock. So you can understand why float wonderfully benefits a business – if it is obtained at a low cost.\"
The acquisition of Geico immediately increased Berkshire’s float by nearly $3 billion. Given Buffett also expected, at the time, that Geico would operate at a decent underwriting profit in most years, this would mean the probability that Berkshire’s total float would “cost it nothing” would increase.
Jain and Berkshire’s advantages in insurance
Buffett called Ajit Jain “the guiding genius of our super-cat business” and noted he writes important non-cat business as well. In insurance, the term \"catastrophe\" is applied to an event, such as a hurricane or earthquake, that causes a great many insured losses. Buffett highlighted Jain’s versatility and...
Happily, both satellites are orbiting, the Lloyd's folk avoided abnormal mortality, and if Mike Tyson looked any healthier, no one would get in the ring with him.\"
Buffett went on to say Berkshire is sought out for many kinds of insurance, both super-cat and large single-risk, because:
\"(1) Our financial strength is unmatched, and insureds know we can and will pay our losses under the most adverse of circumstances; (2) we can supply a quote faster than anyone in the business; and (3) we will issue policies with limits larger than anyone else is prepared to write.\"
Berkshire can move quickly to seize investment and acquisition opportunities. Buffett noted in its insurance business, it has the ability to move “with the same exceptional speed.”
As discussed in prior letters, Buffett said Berkshire’s ability to underwrite very large insurance policies, including for single risks, does not frighten it and actually interests it very much. This is because competition in this segment is much reduced, giving Berkshire pricing power in this area of the market.

========
搜索关键词：巴菲特致股东的信 1996 gelonghui

网页标题：1996年巴菲特致股东的信(附英文版全文)

网页链接：https://www.gelonghui.com/p/520245

网页内容：1996年巴菲特致股东的信（附英文版全文）
4 年前
 8.1k
GLH_b5fd672b
想要让一家好公司的表现发挥到极致，必须依赖优秀的管理人员与明确的目标方向
致伯克希尔·哈撒韦全体股东：
1996年本公司的净值成长了36.1%，约62亿美元，不过每股净值仅成长了31.8%，原因在于去年我们以发行新股的方式并购了国际飞安公司，同时另外还追加发行了一些B级普通股，总计过去32年以来，也就是自从现有经营阶层接手之后，每股净值由当初的19元成长到现在的19,011美元，年复合成长率约为23.8%。
（B级普通股拥有A级普通股三十分之一的权利，这是从1996年五月开始伯克希尔新增的股份类型，在年报中所谓的每股数字系以A级普通股约当数为基础，亦即全部流通在外的A级普通股数加上流通在外的B级普通股数的三十分之一。）
基于技术性原因，我们必须将1995年的财务报表予以重编，这使我能够再度展现令人震惊的会计技巧，相信我，我会试着长话短说。
重编的原因是因为原先被列为被投资的盖可保险在1996年1月2日正式成为伯克希尔100%持有的子公司，从经济观点来看，考量可观的租税优惠与其它优点，我们原先在1995年底持有的51%的GEICO股权，其价值在二天后我们取得剩余49%股权之后大幅增加，然而对于这种渐进式购并，一般公认会计原则却要求我们必须在取得100%股权时，将原来账上51%的成本反向予以调减，使得账面价值减少为4.784亿美元，这结果使得原来51%股权的账面价值不但远低于后来49%股权的取得市价，也低于我们持有后来这49%股权的账面价值。
不过除了刚刚提到净值的减少之外，我们在1996年两度溢价发行股份，第一次是在五月办理现金增资发行B级普通股，第二次是在十二月发行A级与B级普通股，以购并国际飞安公司，总的来说，以上三项非营业项目对于去年本公司31.8%的每股净值成长率的净影响还不到1%。
今年我之所以一再强调每股净值，原因在于它大约就等于我们在去年的实质进展，不过就像是查理跟我一再提醒各位的，对伯克希尔来说，真正重要的不是账面价值，而是实质价值，最近一次跟各位提到是在今年六月本公司发行B级普通股时，在送给各位的股东手册当中，我们不但对于一些名词予以定义，诸如实质价值等，同时也揭露了我们的企业宗旨。
多年来，我们在年报前头揭示这些宗旨，在这里我们偶尔也会提到股东手册，这样我们就可以不必再重复解释一些常用的名词，比如说如果你想要了解一下什么叫实质价值，建议大家可以再翻翻那本手册的第64、65页。
从去年开始我们首度提供给各位一张查理跟我本人认为可以帮助大家估计伯克希尔公司实质价值的表格，在下面这张经过更新资料的表上，我们可以发现到两项与价值相关的重要指针，第一栏是我们平均每股持有的投资金额(包含现金与约当现金)，第二栏则是每股在扣除利息与营业费用之后，来自本业的营业利益(但未扣除所得税与购买法会计调整数)，当然后者已经扣除了所有来自第一栏投资所贡献的股利收入、利息收入与资本利得，事实上，若是把伯克希尔拆成两部分的话，这两栏数字将分别代表这两个部门的损益绩效。
从这张表大家可以看出，我们1996年的每股投资金额增加了29%，而非投资的本业盈余则增加了63.2%，我们的目标是让这两栏的数字以合理的速度稳定地成长，当然若是偶尔能以不合理的速度暴增也不错。
不过这样的预期可能会受到两项现实的因素所干扰，首先，我们很难再达到或接近过去那样高的成长速度，原因在于伯克希尔现在的资本规模实在是太庞大了，事实上以我们现在的资本规模已经可以排在全美企业的前十名，过多的资金一定会影响到整体的报酬率，第二点，不管成长的速度如何，铁定很难以平稳的速度增加，第一栏的数字将很容易随着股市大环境上下波动，第二栏的数字则会跟着超级灾害再保业务获利的不稳定变动而变化。
在这张表中，股东指定捐赠的款项被列为第二栏的减项，虽然我们将之视为股东的福利而非支出，企业其它的支出同样也被放在第二栏当作减项，这些开支远低于其它美国大企业的平均水准，每年我们企业总部的费用占净值的比率大约不到万分之五，即便如此查理还是认为这样的比率高得离谱，我想主要要怪罪于我个人所使用的伯克希尔企业专机-无可辩解号，不过最近在我们买下国际飞安-这家专门负责训练飞行的公司之后，查理的态度有了180度的转变，现在只要一提到飞机他就狂乐不已。
认真的说，控制成本开支绝对重要，举例来说很多共同基金每年的营业费用大多在2%上下，这等于间接剥削了投资人将近10%的投资报酬，虽然查理跟我不敢向各位保证我们的投资绩效，但我们却可以向各位打包票，伯克希尔所赚的每一分钱一定会分文不差地落入股东的口袋里，我们是来帮各位赚钱，而不是帮各位花钱的。
实质价值与股票市价的关系
去年当伯克希尔的股价约在36,000美元时，我曾向各位报告过(1)伯克希尔这几年的股价表现远超越实质价值，虽然后者的成长幅度也相当令人满意，(2)这样的情况不可能无限制地持续下去，(3)查理跟我不认为当时伯克希尔的价值有被低估的可能性。
自从我下了这些批注之后，伯克希尔的实质价值又大幅地增加了，主要的原因在于盖可惊人的表现(关于这点在后面还会向大家详细报告)，而在此同时伯克希尔的股价却维持不动，这代表在1996年伯克希尔的实质价值表现优于股价，也就是说，在今日伯克希尔的价格/价值比比起一年以前而言，又有很大的不同，这同时也是查理跟我认为比较合理的情况。
就长期而言，伯克希尔股东的整体利得一定会与企业经营的获利...

--------
搜索关键词：巴菲特致股东的信 1996 gelonghui

网页标题：Chairman's Letter

网页链接：https://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/1996.html

网页内容：BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY INC.
Chairman's Letter
To the Shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway Inc.:

Our gain in net worth during 1996 was $6.2 billion, or 36.1%.  Per-
share book value, however, grew by less, 31.8%, because the number of
Berkshire shares increased:  We issued stock in acquiring FlightSafety
International and also sold new Class B shares.*   Over the last 32 years
(that is, since present management took over) per-share book value has
grown from $19 to $19,011, or at a rate of 23.8% compounded annually.

* Each Class B share has an economic interest equal to 1/30th of
that possessed by a Class A share, which is the new designation for
the only stock that Berkshire had outstanding before May 1996.
Throughout this report, we state all per-share figures in terms of
\"Class A equivalents,\" which are the sum of the Class A shares
outstanding and 1/30th of the Class B shares outstanding.

For technical reasons, we have restated our 1995 financial
statements, a matter that requires me to present one of my less-than-
thrilling explanations of accounting arcana.  I'll make it brief.

The restatement was required because GEICO became a wholly-owned
subsidiary of Berkshire on January 2, 1996, whereas it was previously
classified as an investment.  From an economic viewpoint - taking into
account major tax efficiencies and other benefits we gained - the value
of the 51% of GEICO we owned at year-end 1995 increased significantly
when we acquired the remaining 49% of the company two days later.
Accounting rules applicable to this type of \"step acquisition,\" however,
required us to write down the value of our 51% at the time we moved to
100%.  That writedown - which also, of course, reduced book value -
amounted to $478.4 million.  As a result, we now carry our original 51%
of GEICO at a value that is both lower than its market value at the time
we purchased the remaining 49% of the company and lower than the value at
which we carry that 49% itself.

There is an offset, however, to the reduction in book value I have
just described:  Twice during 1996 we issued Berkshire shares at a
premium to book value, first in May when we sold the B shares for cash
and again in December when we used both A and B shares as part-payment
for FlightSafety.  In total, the three non-operational items affecting
book value contributed less than one percentage point to our 31.8% per-
share gain last year.

I dwell on this rise in per-share book value because it roughly
indicates our economic progress during the year.  But, as Charlie Munger,
Berkshire's Vice Chairman, and I have repeatedly told you, what counts at
Berkshire is intrinsic value, not book value.  The last time you got that
message from us was in the Owner's Manual, sent to you in June after we
issued the Class B shares.  In that manual, we not only defined certain
key terms - such as intrinsic value -  but also set forth our economic
principles.

For many years, we have listed these principles in the front of our
annual report, but in this report, on pages 58 to 67, we reproduce the
entire Owner's Manual.  In this letter, we will occasionally refer to the
manual so that we can avoid repeating certain definitions and
explanations.  For example, if you wish to brush up on \"intrinsic value,\"
see pages 64 and 65.

Last year, for the first time, we supplied you with a table that
Charlie and I believe will help anyone trying to estimate Berkshire's
intrinsic value.  In the updated version of that table, which follows, we
trace two key indices of value.  The first column lists our per-share
ownership of investments (including cash and equivalents) and the second
column shows our per-share earnings from Berkshire's operating businesses
before taxes and purchase-accounting adjustments but after all interest
and corporate overhead expenses.  The operating-earnings column excludes
all dividends, interest and capital gains that we realized from the
investments presented in the first column.  In effect, the two columns
show what Berkshire would have reported had it been broken into two parts.

\t\t                                 Pre-tax Earnings Per Share
\t                           Investments   Excluding All Income from
Year\t                            Per Share           Investments
----                               -----------   -------------------------
1965...$       4\t        $      4.08
1975...\t  159\t              (6.48)
1985...\t2,443\t              18.86
1995...   22,088\t             258.20
1996...   28,500\t             421.39

Annual Growth Rate, 1965-95...\t33.4%\t              14.7%
One-Year Growth Rate, 1995-96 ...\t29.0%\t              63.2%

As the table tells you, our investments per share increased in 1996
by 29.0% and our non-investment earnings grew by 63.2%.  Our goal is to
keep the numbers in both columns moving ahead at a reasonable (or, better
yet, unreasonable) pace.

Our expectations, however, are tempered by two realities.  First,
our past rates of growth cannot be matched nor even approached:
Berkshire's equity capital is now large - in fact, fewer than ten
businesses in America have capital larger -  and an abundance of funds
tends to dampen returns.  Second, whatever our rate of progress, it will
not be smooth:  Year-to-year moves in the first column of the table above
will be influenced in a major way by fluctuations in securities markets;
the figures in the second column will...
This
entity, which went into operation on December 1, 1996, needed large layers
of reinsurance - and that's where we came in.  Berkshire's layer of
approximately $1 billion will be called upon if the Authority's aggregate
losses in the period ending March 31, 2001 exceed about $5 billion.  (The

--------
搜索关键词：巴菲特致股东的信 1996 gelonghui

网页标题：1996巴菲特致股东信摘录_财富号_东方财富网

网页链接：https://caifuhao.eastmoney.com/news/20250416103059499041940

发布时间：2025-04-16T10:30:00+08:00

网页内容：1996巴菲特致股东信摘录
我只知一 2025年04月16日 10:30
1996年
关于回购
巴菲特：假如你在股价高于内在价值时回购股票，那么你就是在伤害你的股东，和在股价低于内在
价值时增发股票一样。这是真的。当然，困难的地方在于算出（正确的）内在价值。
可口可乐公司是一个好例子。有些人看着可口可乐公司的高市净率或市盈率，就认为可口可乐公司在过高的价格回购股票。但在市盈率和账面价值以外， 可口可乐背后有更多的价值。但内在价值远不止账面价值和市盈 率。任何时候，只要有人给你一些简单的公式来计算内在价值，忽略它吧。
你必须得理解企业理解生意才行。理解可口可乐公司（包括管理层）的人，就会理解且直率地说，多年来，依靠回购股票，可口可乐公司力自己剩下的股东增加了价值。我认为一些人不理解可口可乐公司，或者使用机械的估值方法，因而对可口可乐公司的价值和其股票回购的对错作出了错误的判断。
当你有一门很棒的生意的时候，我们对于其能进一步把生意做好感到非常满意。我们同样对企业在股价低于内在价值的时候进行回购的行为表示欢迎。我可以这样说，假如是一家真正优秀的好企业，我算出的内在价值可能比大多数人算出来得高。多年来，在查理和我的心里已经生发出对一家真正优秀的企业它的能力的无限尊敬。我们知道好企业有多么稀缺。
我们拥有可口可乐公司 8%的股份，但通过他们的回购，我们对可口可乐公司的股权比例显著上升。我们认为当时那些认为可口可乐回购股价过高的人是错的。我想现在谁对谁错已经被事实证明了所以，我强烈建议你们，如果你们要判断回购或发行股票的明智与否，不要从账面价值的角度来考虑，不要从特定的市盈率PE指标来考虑，也不要考虑通过任何模型来判断。相反，你应该挑选自己理解的企业，然后思考你愿意出多少钱买它。长期来看，关键在于回购时的股价是否相对于你愿出的那个价格打折扣。
我们持股的一些其他公司也发生了这样的情况。例如，在过去 15年里，因为 GEICO 回购股票，我们在 GEICO 的持股份额从33%左右上升到 50%以上。我们因此受益匪浅。我想说，其他继续持有的股东也受益匪 浅。我们受益难以置信之多。同时对于 GEICO 而言，股票回购也是一个很明智的行动。GEICO 一般是在股价为其账面价值两倍或更高时回购股票。你也可以将其与其他保险公司相比较，说：“股价太高了。”不过 GEICO 并非其他保险公司可比拟。它是一家非常特殊的公司。我认为他们回购股票是非常明智的。
折现
我们不分析低于我们理解程度门槛的目标。我们坚持分析那些我们自认为理解得很深很透彻的企
业，努力避免使用各种华丽的风险系数，因为坦白说，我们认为这些风险系数只是数字游戏而已。
我认为，对于所在行业五年一变、自身高度不确定的企业，你给它做出的估值没有任何意义。假如你说，鉴于该公司的情况比较复杂，因此我使用的折现率要额外提高 6%，我认为这么做毫无道理。可能在数学上看起来是很有道理，但我认为这是数学的。你最好坚持你能理解的业务，使用政府债券利率进行贴现。当你能以很低的价格买到你很了解的东西时，你就应该开始兴奋了。查理？（笑声）
芒格：没错。折扣曾经比我们现在看到的要大。
巴菲特：这就是你们能得到的（查理所说的），伙计们。（笑声）
分散的看法
4、分散投资是对无知的保护
股东：我对你们多元化经营的政策以及你们如何集中投资很感兴趣。我研究过你的年度报告可以追溯到很多年前，在过去的几年里，你有很多股票在你的有价证券投资组合中。但在 1987年，你只有三只股票。我有两个问题。考虑到你现在在投资组合中的股票数量，这对你对市场的看法意味着什么呢？
第二，似乎无论何时，你进行一项新的投资，你所持有的新头寸永远不会少于总投资组合的50也不会超过总投资组合的 10%，我想看看我说的对不对。
巴菲特：关于第二点，你的理解是不正确的。我们有一些你甚至看不到的头寸，因为我们在上一份报告中只列出了超过6亿的头寸。显然，这些都是较小的金额。有时候，那是因为他们是规模较小的公司，我们无法购买很大的金额。有时是因为我们买了之后价格上涨了。有时候，这是因为我们甚至可能在抛售头寸。所以没有什么魔法。我们喜欢把很多钱报入到我们感兴趣的事情上。
这又回到了分散化的问题。我们认为对知道自己在做什么的人来说，多元化实际上没有什么大意义。多元化是一种对无知的保护手段。假如你要确保你绝不跑输市场，那么你就该每样都买一点儿。多元化没有错，对于不知道怎样分析企业的人来说，多元化是完美的明智选择。
假如你知道怎样评估企业的价值，那么持有 50 只、40 只或30只股票就是疯狂之举，因为不管怎样，一个人是不可能找那么多的被低估的好公司的。不去多买一些非常好的企业，却把钱投进一个由
30或 50家公司组成的有吸引力公司列表上，在查理和我的眼里，这种行为是疯狂之举。这是一种习惯做法。假如你的目标是达到市场平均水平，那么多元化能保证你不被炒鱿鱼。但是照我们看来，若你采用多元化策略，那就是坦白承认你并不真正理解你投资的企业。
你知道，基于个人投资组合，我拥有一支股票。但这是我知道的生意。这让我很舒服。（笑声）我是否需要拥有28只股票，才能有适当的分散化？这将是无稽之谈。在伯克希尔，我可以挑选出三家公司。如果他们是我们唯一拥有的公司，我将非常高兴，我所有的钱都在伯克希尔。现在，事实上我们可以找到更多，而且还在不断增加。要想在这一生中做得很好，三件出色的事情是远远不够的。
一般人不会遇到这种情况。我的意思是，如果你看看这个国家是如何创造财富的，他们不是由50家公司组合而成的。它们是由一个个认为自己...

--------
搜索关键词：巴菲特致股东的信 1996 gelonghui

网页标题：巴菲特致股东的信 1996上 1996年本公司的净值成长了36.1%，约62亿美元，不过每股净值仅成长了31.8%，原因在于去年我们以发行新股的方式并...

网页链接：https://xueqiu.com/2312151372/242928006?md5__1038=110279f682e-+94khadaykXaQrSaVwY0Xy3LiHK8wJcwL24YlYs+osGazDwNTGX3+szNPaKc2eg9kaXawCLroaaWaokX%2FawkwWJaGhu0aVkd%2FazkXYaDIT3LHa4CLNaE0LuaXsaH%2FJr%2FLladsL=S0XoWckdMaw70aljobwaR=l99oa4w7djai+dPYaw+ZyWUTodBAgv30a

发布时间：2023-02-24T23:22:00+08:00

网页内容：巴菲特致股东的信 1996上

生命不息918
2023-02-24 23:22
1996年本公司的净值成长了36.1%，约62亿美元，不过每股净值仅成长了31.8%，原因在于去年我们以发行新股的方式并购了国际飞安公司，同时另外还追加发行了一些B级普通股，总计过去32年以来，也就是自从现有经营阶层接手之后，每股净值由当初的19元成长到现在的19,011美元，年复合成长率约为23.8%。
B级普通股拥有A级普通股三十分之一的权利，这是从1996年五月开始伯克希尔新增的股份类型，在年报中所谓的每股数字系以A级普通股约当数为基础，亦即全部流通在外的A级普通股数加上流通在外的B级普通股数的三十分之一。
基于技术性原因，我们必须将1995年的财务报表予以重编，这使我能够再度展现令人震摄的会计密技，相信我，我会试着长话短说。
重编的原因是因为原先被列为被投资的GEICO保险在1996年1月2日正式成为伯克希尔100%持有的子公司，从经济观点来看，考量可观的租税优

--------
搜索关键词：巴菲特致股东的信 1996 gelonghui

网页标题：
